#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\use_default_options false
\begin_modules
theorems-ams
eqs-within-sections
figs-within-sections
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "courier" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks false
\pdf_pdfborder false
\pdf_colorlinks false
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Lax Pairs
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Randomized notes about Lax pairs.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Stuff
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
L=iA\frac{\partial}{\partial x}+\left[A,Q\right]
\]

\end_inset


\begin_inset Formula 
\[
M=iB\frac{\partial}{\partial x}+\left[B,Q\right]
\]

\end_inset

with 
\begin_inset Formula $A,B$
\end_inset

 being 
\begin_inset Formula $N\times N$
\end_inset

 diagonal matrixes 
\begin_inset Formula $A=a_{i}\delta_{ij}$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $B=b_{i}\delta_{ij}$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $Q$
\end_inset

 in general space and time dependent.
 Then these form a Lax pair:
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\frac{\partial L}{\partial t}=i\left[L,M\right]
\]

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
From what I can tell, 
\begin_inset Formula $Q$
\end_inset

 is often a sum traceless hermitian and anti-hermitian matrices.
 viz.
 
\begin_inset Formula $\mbox{tr}Q=0$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $Q=Q_{s}+Q_{a}$
\end_inset

 with 
\begin_inset Formula $Q_{s}^{\dagger}=Q_{s}$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $Q_{a}^{\dagger}=-Q_{a}$
\end_inset

 but is 
\begin_inset Formula $Q$
\end_inset

 always like this?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For inverse scattering, solve 
\begin_inset Formula $L\psi=\lambda\psi$
\end_inset

 and take plain-wave asymptotics.
 and the usual.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
