#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass acmart
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\end_preamble
\options format=acmsmall
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "courier" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks false
\pdf_pdfborder false
\pdf_colorlinks false
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 0
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Reading List / Bibliography
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepstas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Things I haven't read, or maybe I have.
 Things I should read, or maybe re-read.
 Maybe reviews, but probably not.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Preface
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I've been keeping a similar list for AI topics, elsewhere.
 It's got like 100 items on it.
 This is an analogous list, but for physics/math.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
The list
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Here goes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
Noise & Chaos (March 2024)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
Spontaneous stochasticity amplifies even thermal noise to the largest scales
 of turbulence in a few eddy turnover times,
\emph default
 Dmytro Bandak, Alexei Mailybaev, Gregory L.
 Eyink, Nigel Goldenfeld (2024) 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
name "https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.13881"
target "https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.13881"
literal "false"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
My vague, ill-formed thoughts.
 The stochastic diff-eq's have an uncountable number of probabilistically-weight
ed solutions.
 i.e.
 some Borel measure describes the set of solutions.
 The classical physics diffeq's have a unique solution determined by boundary
 conditions (e.g.
 Dirichlet).
 Number-theory diffeq's (such as Riemann surfaces) have unique solutions
 that are deterministic but chaotic.
 Sometimes perhaps ergodic, mixing, etc.
 Deterministic means 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

in the limit of infinite precision
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 i.e.
 in the limit of infinite precision, the single-particle orbits aka geodesics
 are unique and unqiuely determined.
 Gravitational diffeqs with naked singularities (e.g.
 in five dimensions) have Cauchy horizons: boundary conditions on the horizon
 aren't enough to pin down solutions.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In this paper: authors take a stochastic diffeq (so, probabilistic solutions)
 and takes limit of noise to zero, Reynolds number to infty, to get the
 Navier-Stokes.
 In this limit, even though the noise is zero, the probilistic solutions
 remain and don't vanish.
 So, even in the limit of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

infinite precision
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, a probabilistic element cannot be avoided.
 More importantly: the probabilistic disturbances are amplified to finite
 size in finite time.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
QM descriptions have the opposite issue: we want to have almost all worlds
 of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

many worlds
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 to collapse to (exactly) zero probability in finite time.
 So a reversal of the process above: have a probabilistic measure become
 a delta function in finite time (or at least, shrink to 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

subatomic
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, quantum-sized scales.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
Chaotic magnetic field lines
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
The misconception of closed magnetic flux lines
\emph default
, Luca Zilberti.
 (2017) IEEE Magnetics Letters, vol.
 8, art.
 1306005.
 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
name "(PDF)"
target "https://www.researchgate.net/publication/316467579_The_Misconception_of_Closed_Magnetic_Flux_Lines"
literal "false"

\end_inset

 reviews the idea that magnetic field lines can sometimes terminate or originate
 on singular points.
 More interestingly, magnetic field lines can be made to wrap around a torus
 with irrational winding ratio, so that a single magnetic field line becomes
 dense in the torus, as it wraps around! References papers that talk about
 chaotic magnetic fields, and the ubiquity of singular points in such cases.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
My imagination kicks in.
 In algebraic geometry (e.g.
 Riemann surfaces) singular points are called 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
name "Divisors"
target "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Divisor_(algebraic_geometry)"
literal "false"

\end_inset

 and so can we amploy the mechanics of divisors to capture (and completely
 describe) the resulting chaotic field lines? That is, can we say that the
 chaotic field lines are completely describable by saying 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

there is a singular point here, here and here, and everything is irrotational
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

? That is, chaotic motion is normally described by geodesics, and statements
 about the Lyapunov divergence of nearby geodesics.
 Can this be replaced by a global description that enumerates a set of singular
 points?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The case is interesting, because it uses curl (in 3D) or Hodge star and
 1-forms in n-D.
 Hmm.
 That suggests that there's a (countable) list of singular points, possibly/prob
ably distributed as some Cantor dust.
 Extending field lines from such points then generates manifolds, to either
 side of which is distinct behavior.
 Hmm.
 Am I just painfully rediscovering a Cartan decomposition into stable, unstable,
 neutral manifolds?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
At the end of this article, the following is written: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

In the presence of lines that fill a region indefinitely, it is not possible
 to associate the line density with the field magnitude (unless one is able,
 in this region, to “count” each line only once).
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 This rings alarm bells! So, consider the torus, with these spiraling ergodic
 flux lines, dense in the torus.
 We now want to partition the torus into points, such that each point has
 exactly one magnetic flux line passing through it.
 Conventional intuition is that this is a non-measurable set, since, if
 it were measureable, it would resolve the Banach–Tarski paradox.
 This is remarkable: a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

physical
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 example of non-measurable sets, the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

measure
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 of which is needed to compute the magnetic flux passing through a Stokes
 thm.
 surface.
 That is, each magnetic field line must be counted only once; this is the
 measure.
 What a minder binder!
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
