#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\usepackage{slashed}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "cmtt" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
An Ergodic Qubit
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepstas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
13 May 2023
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
A toy model for coupling a qubit to an external environment is presented.
 In this model, an experimenter applies a long sequence one of two different
 unitary transformations to the qubit.
 The sequence is determined by a sequence of coin-flips, that is, a Bernoulli
 process.
 Accompanied by some ruminations and commentary.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The abstract says it all; if you can easily envision a qubit, and one of
 two unitary transformations being determined by a coinfip, then you will
 learn little or nothing by reading this! But if you've never thought about
 this before, then one can get some minor amount of entertainment from it.
 The content is ideal for physics undergrads, as it provides an excuse to
 review Bernoulli porcesses, ergodicity and unitary transformations on qubits.
 However, I am not writing for undergrads, but for myself, and so there
 might be some sharp edges in here (or maybe blunt ones, depending on your
 perspective.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

toy model
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, as the sequence of unitary transforms can be imagined to come from some
 external thermal bath.
 The effect on the qubit is to 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

thermalize it
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

; yet, there are no 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

measurements
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 that are made, and all time evolution (from the point of view of the qubit)
 is unitary.
 None-the-less, external 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

forces
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 act on the qubit to 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

erase
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 it's past, in an 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

unrecoverable
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 fashion.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I just thought of this idea a week or two ago.
 I have no clue if its been persented before.
 It is sufficiently trivial that I fully expect that it has been taught
 or explained in classes, maybe even appearing in textbooks, decades earlier.
 I have no clue if this is the case.
 If you know, let me know.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
