#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\usepackage{slashed}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "cmtt" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Ergodicity and Entropy for Black Holes
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepstas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
16 May 2023
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Famously, Hawking relates the entropy 
\begin_inset Formula $S$
\end_inset

 of a black hole to the surface area 
\begin_inset Formula $A$
\end_inset

 of the even horizon as 
\begin_inset Formula $S=A/4$
\end_inset

.
 This suggests that there should be some associated micro-canonical ensemble
 on the event horizon, and perhaps some sort ergodic process that is stirring
 the ensemble.
 For example, could the ensemble be a spin connection or something related?
 Could the stirring be provided by a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

thermal
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 background of small gravitational waves impinging on the event horizon,
 or perhaps something else? This text casually explores some possibilities.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The current abstract frames the question.
 This is my low-brow attempt to understand things.
 The writing style that will follow below will be extremely informal, loose,
 having the shape of a diary or personal notes, with a lot of editorializing
 and stream-of-consciousness thinking.
 It is not structured as an exposition or some tight article meant for a
 peer-reviewed journal.
 Lots of what will be written down will be half-formed, incorrect, misleading,
 confused.
 Such flaws may or may not be corrected at a later date.
 Frankly, I'm writing this for myself, and not for you.
 Maybe later, the notes here can be converted into something formal.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
First, the general setting; my frame of mind in posing this question.
 I'm thinking 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

this has something to do with spin connections
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 because there is very little else that it could be, if the entropy has
 a classical, non-quantum source.
 That is, my efforts here will be almost entirely based on classical mechanics
 and conventional dynamical systems theory, rather than invoking quantum
 from the get-go.
 The hope is to either find a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

classical
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 description, and, if not, then expose why there is no such description.
 Now, again, perhaps this sounds foolish, as there is an implicit 
\begin_inset Formula $\hbar=1$
\end_inset

 floating around.
 I'm hoping that the presence of 
\begin_inset Formula $\hbar$
\end_inset

 does not necessarily imply quantization; so, for example, Fourier transforms
 do not require 
\begin_inset Formula $\hbar$
\end_inset

 even though they are conventionally used to construct QM.
 In a similar way, 
\begin_inset Formula $\hbar$
\end_inset

 is not required to define Poincare duality or any other common concepts
 from differential geometry, even though cohomological results are 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

naturally quantized
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 So, more precisely, I'm trying to avoid invoking second quantization and
 Feynmann path integrals.
 I'm entirely happy to call a Dirac field and Pauli exclusion as 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

purely classical
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 objects.
 Mostly because these follow from Riemannian geometry and from Clifford
 algebras.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In any case, what was Hawking thinking, when he wrote this? I honestly don't
 know.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Perhaps this undertaking is a fools errand, given AdS-CFT.
 Perhaps the errand will result in little other than some convoluted rediscovery
 of AdS-CFT.
 Perhaps if will lead somewhere else.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Some references for spin connections:
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand cite
key "Jost2002geom"
literal "false"

\end_inset


\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand cite
key "Papa2004"
literal "false"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
TODO list:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Recap Hawkings original arguments
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Write down Dirac eqn at the Swarzschild event horizon
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Killing vector fields
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So, the very first thing we want to do is to pick a simple case, and explore
 it in the most concrete, direct way possible.
 It seems that this would be to write down spin connections at the event
 horizon of a Swarzschild BH.
 The obvious choice of coordinates is to pick infalling frames, slap vierbeins
 on that, and then write down spinors in the vierbein frame.
 Sounds easy enough.
 But...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One can envision the infalling direction as a hedgehog, orthogonal to the
 surface of the event horizon.
 That gives one coordinate, the tangent space gives the other two.
 And so we arrive at the first 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

gotcha
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 The 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

you can't comb hair on a sphere
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 theorem means this cannot be done naively, and we'll need to use Killing
 fields to define the vierbeins.
 So that makes things a little messy, right off the bat.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Next, the natural presence of a hedgdehog promptly raises questions of non-trivi
al topological maps, twists between the vierbein field and the spin complex.
 Now, I haven't even started the exercise, and already, the vacuum state,
 with now fermions in it, seems to have a non-trivial topology.
 Maybe I'm wrong, but need to keep an eye on this.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A short note about 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

fermions
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

: the goal here is to use (ideally) the simplest possible spinors, the Weyl
 spinors.
 From the physics point of view, these correspond to a representation that
 is massless and chiral.
 However, for the low low price of adding complex numbers, we get charge
 conjugation and thus Dirac spinors, which have both massive and massless
 representations.
 Just to make things extra-confusing, there are also Majorana spinors, which
 do not carry a charge.
 As always, Majorana will be short-changed in the discussion.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A secondary goal is to avoid talking about spinors, directly.
 I'm not here to write out solutions to the Dirac eqn near a BH.
 That's not the goal, not really.
 I'm hoping that insight can be gained, without having to look at explicit
 solutions.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
More interesting is the Kerr metric.
 This may, however, be too much, so we punt on that, for now.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset CommandInset bibtex
LatexCommand bibtex
btprint "btPrintCited"
bibfiles "/home/linas/src/fractal/paper/fractal"
options "tufte"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
