#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\usepackage{slashed}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "cmtt" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Past and future in Black Holes
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

Part three of the Ergodicity/Entropy series
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepstas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
31 May 2023
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
This text proposes a series of thought experiments involving 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

physical
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 objects falling through the event horizon of a Schwarschild black hole.
 The first is that of a free-falling observer, with a free-falling flashlight
 in front.
 What does the observer see, as the flashlight crosses the event horizon?
 This thought experiment can be generalized in various ways, including (for
 example) a free-falling machine gun shooting BB's at a fixed energy and
 regular rate.
 All of these should be exactly, precisely solvable, as the Schwarschild
 metric seems easy enough to do so.
 A second set of thought experiments are proposed, involving the Huygens
 sum of the quantities from the first.
 It is hypothesized that the Huygens sum should correspond to the classical
 wave equations in curved spacetime (but I have not yet done the calculations,
 so I don't know.) It is possible that there is some textbook or ArXiv preprint
 that already solves all of this, but I don't know.
 Onward ho!
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Introduction: Past and future
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Here's a confusing thought experiment.
 Suppose one follows a free-falling (non-spinning) geodesic into a Schwarschild
 black hole.
 This is radial motion.
 Suppose that, in front of you, there is a free-falling flashlight, aimed
 back at you.
 That is, the flashlight is always closer to the event horizon than you
 are.
 What, exactly, happens, as you cross the event horizon?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This question is asked and answers in the following StackExchange posts:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
https://physics.stackexchange.com/questions/187917/thought-experiment-would-you-no
tice-if-you-fell-into-a-black-hole
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
https://physics.stackexchange.com/questions/188394/taking-selfies-while-falling-wo
uld-you-be-able-to-notice-a-horizon-before-hitti
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
These answers use the principle of equivalence.
 In a small enough reference frame, where curvature can be ignored, both
 you and your flashlight are travelling in an inertial frame.
 Nothing happens as you cross the EH, it is just an aparent horizon for
 observers at infinity.
 Your light-cones look normal and fine.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The EH itself is a light-like surface.
 There's no tunneling of waves across it, from what I can tell.
 massive propagators necessarily vanish on the light-cone.
 Massless propagators necessarily vanish off the light-cone.
 This holds true, independent of local cruvature (right!? Or is there a
 curvature term I'm forgetting?)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Consider now a spherical shell of such lights: in front, to the sides, behind.
 Initialy, these are uniformly distributed and of equal brightness.
 As the observer in the center of this spherical shell, what do you see?
 By equivalence principle, if you and the lights are all in a co-moving
 frame, and distances are small enough that the frame is locally flat, then
 you see everything as it should be, in flat space.
 In particular, the EH is just an apparent horizon.
 Nothing happens as it is crossed.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Thanks to the magic of GPS, we can time-stamp the flashlight emissions with
 the proper time for the emitter; so the receiver can always unambiguously
 know when a signal was emitted.
 Recall how this is done: each GPS transmitter (in this case, the LED of
 the flashlight) blinks out a pseudo-random sequence of bits.
 Based on the received bitstream, the receiver can know what the proper
 time was, when the stream was transmitted.
 This has the nice side-effect of not only talking about coordinate systems
 in the abstract, but allowing that information to be encoded in a concrete
 fashion.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Conventional narratives talk about brightness.
 and so we have to ask about that as well.
 What, exactly, do we mean by brightness? There are two aspects to this
 question.
 First: are there areas where the flashlights appear to bunch up toghether
 (and thus get brighter?) Second: of the narrow cone of emitted light, coming
 from that flashlight, is most of that cone dispersed away from you (thus
 getting dimmer), or is it focused towards you (thus getting brighter?)
 This second question assumes that brightness corresponds to the density
 of incoming null geodesics.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The above thought experiment was phrased with flashlights, so that we consider
 only those light-like geodesics that connect the flashlight, and you, the
 observer.
 There is now a secondary question: as this flashlights fall, do they continue
 to be aimed at the center of the sphere, or do they twist away in some
 other direction? If so, which direction? What is the formula for that?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What happens if the flashlights are replaced by uniform emitters? This situation
 is rather more complicated, as, before the sphere of emitters crosses the
 even horizon, some of those null geodesics can orbit the black hole one
 or more times.
 What happens after all of the shell has fallen through the event horizon?
 Are there any 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

delayed null geodesics
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, those that spiral around a few times, before falling in? Do you see them?
 Does this cause any kind of discretization (labelled by number of orbits
 taken?)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The above treated light as a scalar, without any polarization.
 All calculations have to be redone with the case of polarization.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Now repeat the exercise with massive particles.
 That is, replace the flashlight by a machine gun shooting BB's at you,
 fixing the mass of the BB, the rate of fire, and the momentum/energy of
 the shot.
 These are the time-like geodesics.
 What do you see? 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Next, repeat the exercise with spinning bullets.
 The spin can be arbitrarily oriented.
 Is there precession?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Finally, repeat this with Weyl spinors.
 These are massless, and follow null geodesics.
 This is somewhat confusing, since along each null geodesic, we have to
 provide a fierbein, so that we can construct the Clifford algebra in the
 fierbein coordinate system, and then construct the Weyl spinors in that
 coordinate system.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And then, one more step: repeat this with classical Dirac point particles.
 So, just like above, we assign to heave timelike geodesic a fierbein, slap
 the Dirac gamma matrices onto it, and then discuss the time evolution of
 Dirac spinors, as they move along these freely-falling geodesics.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Huygens sums
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The above was a program for determining the behavior of classical particles,
 moving along null or timelike geodesics.
 We now want to repeat the exercise, this time performing Huygens sums.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The correct way to do this is to imagine falling with a massless dust of
 robots.
 The job of each robot is to intercept all particles propagating on all
 geodesics that intersect with the robot, perform a sum of all amplitudes
 and phases on those geodesics, and then to become a point emitter, and
 re-radiate that data, uniformly in all directions in that robots local
 free-falling coordinate frame.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For the null geodesics, we need to track not only the frequency (redshift/bluesh
ift) but also a phase.
 The phase is presumably an integral over the proper time along the geodesic.
 This is fine for timelike geodesics, but what about null geodesics? Is
 the phase synchronous along the null geodesic? That is, can we take the
 phase to just be a constant number along the null geodesic? That is, each
 flashlight emits three things: a null geodesic, a complex number (the phase)
 that is held constant on the geodesic, and (optionally) a polarization
 vector that ...
 ?? I guess the polarization evolve according to the connection between
 the frame fields?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Anyway, when this Huygens sum is performed, is the result the classical
 wave equation in curved spacetime?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For the massive particles (time-like geodesics), the phase evolves as a
 clock moving in proper time.
 The Huygens sum will presumably result in the Klien–Gordon equation.
 But this is a hypothesis; it is not obvious that this will actually happen.
 How does all of this work out? What are the details?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For the classical point-particle spinors, the Huygens sum presumably results
 in the Weyl wave equation in curved spacetime? Likewise for classical point-par
ticle Dirac spinors.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Quantum mechanics
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The above considerations are all derived by considering null geodesics as
 carriers of information.
 It ignores the quantum mechanical nature of atoms.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The next issue is QFT.
 The Huygens sum can be imagined as tree-level Feynmann diagrams.
 What about loops? The textbook answer here is that there are textbooks
 on this, too.
 At least, for mild curvatures, which are not too large, one can write down
 QFT on such static backgrounds.
 I'm not sure what happens to the Feynmann path integrals at the EH, though.
 I guess this is the big stink about the firewall problem, eh?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Plan of attack
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
First, we need a suitable coordinate system for frames propagating along
 null geodesics.
 The Euler angles would be one, but that's cumbersome.
 Equivalently, one could work with Pauli matrices, and then compare to the
 Euler angles as needed.
 The Pauli matrices are just what the spin connection provides, and so we
 need to integrate the spin connection along null geodesics.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
However, for a scalar light field, we don't need to full set of Euler angles,
 so, for that case, we just need a way of parameterizing the null tangent
 space at some point in the Schwarschild space.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is dumb.
 I should just look this up, online.
 Instead of wasting time wondiering.
 Others have solved this already ....
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Flashlight geodesics
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The introduction proposes a priviledged point, the astronaut, surrounded
 by a spherical shell of infalling flashlights.
 For practical calculations, it is more convenient to visualize the astronaut
 as being surrounded by a cloud, a uniformly distributed dust of flashlights.
 The goal of this section is to describe the infalling geodesics of the
 astronaut and these flashlights.
 Since these are meant to be radially infalling, this should be easy.
 To make the notation unambiguous, some preliminaries need to be cleared
 up.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Conceptual framework
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This dust of flashlights should be thought of as a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

smart dust
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, so that each flashlight is a computer, capable of carrying a universally
 unique id (UUID) that identifies it.
 When each flashlight broadcasts, it should be thought of as a GPS transmitter,
 so that the transmission encodes the UUID number.
 This does not alter the mathematical description of the geodesics in any
 way; instead, the goal here is that each geodesic can be given a unique,
 unambiguous label, about which there can be no confusion.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Furthermore, when a flashlight broadcasts, it can also encode the direction
 in which it is broadcasting the signal.
 That is, each flashlight carries an intertial frame (say, by gyroscopes
 built into it), and when the flashlight transmits a narrow beam in some
 given direction, it can encode that direction into the beam itself.
 Recall the engineering of this: it can be done with pseudorandom bit sequences.
 The flashlight modulates the transmission with this directional information
 (using AM, FM, SSB, PCM, quadrature; any conventional radio technique will
 work.) Again, this changes nothing, other than reinforcing the idea that
 each null geodesic emanating from the flashlight can be uniquely identified
 with the initial direction in which it was emitted.
 The flashlight can also carry a clock, measuring the proper time for that
 flashlight, and this time can also be encoded into the transmission.
 Thus, for each null geodesic, it can be accurately labelled with a timestamp
 indicating the proper time when it was emitted.
 Note finally that each radio transmission can also be polarized, thus indicatin
g the remaining degree of freedom in the positioning of the transmitter.
 That is, radio waves can completely encode information about the transmitter
 at the time of the transmission.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Although the word 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

flashlight
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is used, implying light or radio emissions propagating along null geodesics,
 these flashlights could equally be machine rifles, shooting 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

smart bullets
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 In this case, each bullet could be a computer.
 This computer can carry information about which gun it was shot from, and
 when, and what direction (so, the same as the radio transmissions), but
 also the velocity.
 Each bullet can be equipped with a clock, and with gyroscopes, so that,
 again, there is no doubt whatsoever is to it's inertial frame.
 Each bullet is also capable of acting as a radio receiver, and recording
 a history of those receptions; bullets have 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

memory of the past
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Upon reception of the bullet by the observer (the falling astronaut), this
 information can be queried and analyzed by the astronaut.
 Again, this does not change any of the algebra used to describe the geodesics;
 it does, however, sharpen the the kind of information that can be attached
 to the timelike geodesics emitted by the flashlight-guns.
 Also worth keeping in mind that the null geodesics cannot carry this kind
 of information.
 The null geodesic cannot 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

remember
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 what it saw along the way; the null geodesic has no proper time, no recording
 mechanism, no memory, no subjective, experienced history.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Flashlight labels
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We now proceed to label the flashlights.
 Starting at a location 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

at infinity
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, i.e.
 
\begin_inset Formula $r\gg2m$
\end_inset

, where spacetime is approximately flat, we establish an inertial frame.
 This frame can be labelled with either orthonormal coordinates 
\begin_inset Formula $x,y,z$
\end_inset

 or with polar coordinates.
 The labelling is done at time 
\begin_inset Formula $t=t_{0}$
\end_inset

, and we set the proper time to 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau=\tau_{0}$
\end_inset

 for all flashlights.
 There is no engineering or mathematical challenge to arranging this.
 Its all standard lab technique.
 Place the astronaut at the origin, the privileged point 
\begin_inset Formula $x=y=z=0$
\end_inset

.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For polar coordinates, the following notation is used: 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
With respect to the Schwarschild coordinates, the astronaut is initially
 located at at 
\begin_inset Formula $r=r_{0}\gg2m$
\end_inset

 and with 
\begin_inset Formula $\theta=0$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi=0$
\end_inset

 in the Schwarschild chart.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Let 
\begin_inset Formula $R=\sqrt{x^{2}+y^{2}+z^{2}}$
\end_inset

 be the radial location of a flashlight with respect to the astronaut.
 This number should be thought of as a UUID, a constant that never changes.
 It is stored in the flashlight computer memory itself, and does not change.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
In general, we'll wish to keep the cloud of flashlights relatively small,
 so that 
\begin_inset Formula $R\ll r_{0}$
\end_inset

 is a valid assumption.
 It seems like this could be a useful simplifying assumption, at some point.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The flashlights are meant to be uniformly distributed, so that we can meaningful
ly talk about a Euclidean measure 
\begin_inset Formula $\mu$
\end_inset

 describing the local density of the flashlights.
 We will want to track the time evolution of this measure, although this
 might prove to be a challenging task.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Let the polar coordinates of a flashlight be denoted by 
\begin_inset Formula $0\le\alpha\le\pi$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $-\pi\le\beta\le\pi$
\end_inset

.
 These are the altitude and azimuth, respectively.
 The convention is that 
\begin_inset Formula $\alpha=0$
\end_inset

 is the zenith, pointing towards the black hole.
 The azimuth 
\begin_inset Formula $\beta$
\end_inset

 must be specified with respect to the celestial meridian.
 It is aligned so that 
\begin_inset Formula $\beta=0$
\end_inset

 corresponds to 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi=0$
\end_inset

.
 (That is, each flashlight will be located at some 
\begin_inset Formula $\theta\ne0$
\end_inset

 and therefore at some generally non-zero 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

.
 It is convenient to place the meridian 
\begin_inset Formula $\beta=0$
\end_inset

 at the same place where 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi=0$
\end_inset

.) Let the letter 
\begin_inset Formula $\gamma$
\end_inset

 be reserved for the third Euler angle, which will be needed to determine
 the flashlight polarization.
 It will be defined later.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
These angular coordinates are meant only to uniquely identify each flashlight.
 Again, they are a UUID assigned to each flashlight.
 This UUID number does not change over time.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The orthonormal coordinates 
\begin_inset Formula $x,y,z$
\end_inset

 for the lab frame (body frame) are related in the standard way:
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
x & =R\sin\alpha\cos\beta\\
y & =R\sin\alpha\sin\beta\\
z & =R\cos\alpha
\end{align*}

\end_inset

Positive 
\begin_inset Formula $z$
\end_inset

 points towards the black hole, it corresponds to 
\begin_inset Formula $\alpha=0$
\end_inset

.
 Positive 
\begin_inset Formula $x$
\end_inset

 corresponds to 
\begin_inset Formula $\beta=0$
\end_inset

.
 The coordinates are right-handed, so that positive 
\begin_inset Formula $y$
\end_inset

 corresponds to 
\begin_inset Formula $\beta=\pi/2$
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Initial flashlight positions
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
With the above notation, let us then describe the geodesic of each flashlight,
 together with the lab frame center.
 Let each flashlight be denoted by a point 
\begin_inset Formula $p$
\end_inset

.
 This 
\begin_inset Formula $p$
\end_inset

 is understood to be the UUID of the flashlight.
 We wish to relate the lab-frame coordinates to the Schwarzschild coordinate
 chart in the Schwarzschild spacetime manifold.
 Furthermore, we want to track each flashlight individually, as it falls.
 Thus, we solve the geodesic equation for radially infalling flashlights.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
At time 
\begin_inset Formula $t=t_{0}$
\end_inset

, we have that 
\begin_inset Formula $p\left(x,y,z\right)$
\end_inset

 is located at the Schwarschild location 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(r,\theta,\phi\right)$
\end_inset

 given by inverting the relations
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
x & =r\sin\theta\cos\phi\\
y & =r\sin\theta\sin\phi\\
z & =r\cos\theta-r_{0}
\end{align*}

\end_inset

The distribution of the cloud is such that 
\begin_inset Formula $\theta\ll1$
\end_inset

.
 The center of the cloud is at 
\begin_inset Formula $x=y=z=0$
\end_inset

, and so at 
\begin_inset Formula $r=r_{0}$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\theta=\phi=0$
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Flashlight geodesics (in the Schwarzschild chart)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
At later times, we wish to write 
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
r & =r\left(p,\tau\right)\\
\theta & =\theta\left(p,\tau\right)\\
\phi & =\phi\left(p,\tau\right)\\
t & =t\left(p,\tau\right)
\end{align*}

\end_inset

so that for a given flashlight 
\begin_inset Formula $p$
\end_inset

 and a given proper time 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau$
\end_inset

, it is located at the above Schwarzschild coordinates.
 Each individual flashlight is meant to free-fall radially inwards.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Geodesic equations via Christoffel symbols
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This section attempts to brute-force our way through the geodesic equations.
 This is more or less always a mistake, as it is painful both to obtain
 the Christoffel symbols, and to then integrate the geodesics.
 A different reason that this is a mistake is that it almost always obscures
 the geometric properties of the system.
 However, for this section, we choose to make this mistake, mostly because
 Schwarschild should not be all that hard, and it also provides a good alternati
ve route.
 Even so, lets take some shortcuts, and copy what we need from existing
 texts, which is good enough for present purposes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We assume Wikipedia is correct (it wasn't, but I just now fixed it, after
 enduring some calculational pain), and work with the Wikipedia article
 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
name "Schwarzschild geodesics"
target "https://en.whttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schwarzschild_geodesicsikipedia.org/wiki/Schwarzschild_geodesics"
literal "false"

\end_inset

.
 This states
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
0 & =\frac{d\phi}{d\tau}\\
0 & =\frac{d\theta}{d\tau}\\
0 & =\frac{d^{2}t}{d\tau^{2}}+\frac{1}{w}\frac{dw}{dr}\frac{dt}{d\tau}\frac{dr}{d\tau}\\
0 & =\frac{d^{2}r}{d\tau^{2}}-\frac{1}{v}\frac{dv}{dr}\left(\frac{dr}{d\tau}\right)^{2}+\frac{1}{2v}\frac{dw}{dr}\left(\frac{dt}{d\tau}\right)^{2}
\end{align*}

\end_inset

where 
\begin_inset Formula $w\left(r\right)=1-2m/r$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $v\left(r\right)=1/w$
\end_inset

.
 I hand-verified the above.
 It's correct.
 The third equation corresponds to a constant of motion 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\frac{d}{d\tau}\left[\left(1-\frac{2m}{r}\right)\frac{dt}{d\tau}\right]=0
\]

\end_inset

which is given by the energy
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
E=m\left(1-\frac{2m}{r}\right)\frac{dt}{d\tau}
\]

\end_inset

At time 
\begin_inset Formula $t=t_{0}$
\end_inset

 and at 
\begin_inset Formula $r=r_{0}\gg2m$
\end_inset

, we have 
\begin_inset Formula $dt/d\tau\approx1$
\end_inset

 because we are far away.
 This gives 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
E\approx m\left(1-\frac{2m}{r_{0}}\right)\approx m
\]

\end_inset

 and
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
t\left(p,\tau\right)=\frac{E}{m}\int_{\tau_{0}}^{\tau}\frac{r\left(p,s\right)}{r\left(p,s\right)-2m}ds
\]

\end_inset

Yuck.
 Ugly.
 For the radial equation, I get
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
0=\frac{d^{2}r}{d\tau^{2}}-\frac{m}{r^{2}}\frac{1}{\left(1-\frac{2m}{r}\right)}\left[\left(\frac{dr}{d\tau}\right)^{2}-\frac{E^{2}}{m^{2}}\right]
\]

\end_inset

Rearranging, this gives the eqn
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
r^{2}\frac{d^{2}r}{d\tau^{2}}\left(1-\frac{2m}{r}\right)=m\left[\left(\frac{dr}{d\tau}\right)^{2}-\frac{E^{2}}{m^{2}}\right]
\]

\end_inset

which is sinfully ugly.
 Solutions can be brute-forced; these are given below.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Geodesic equations via Lagrangian
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This section is mostly a recapitulation of the presentation provided in
 the course notes 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
name "Radial Infall Lecture 31 Physics 411 Classical Mechanics II 14 November 2007 Reed College"
target "https://www.reed.edu/physics/courses/Physics411/html/411/page2/files/Lecture.31.pdf"
literal "false"

\end_inset

.
 Its slightly more verbose in some places, and more compact in others.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The Lagrangian for a massive particle following a time-like trajectory is
 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
L=\frac{1}{2}g_{\mu\nu}\dot{x}^{\mu}\dot{x}^{\nu}
\]

\end_inset

where the shorthand 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\dot{x}^{\mu}=\frac{dx^{\mu}}{d\tau}
\]

\end_inset

is used.
 It's also handy to recall the Legendre transform.
 Defining the conjugate momentum as
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
p_{\mu}=\frac{\partial L}{\partial\dot{x}^{\mu}}
\]

\end_inset

the Hamiltonian is then 
\begin_inset Formula $H=p_{\mu}\dot{x}^{\mu}-L$
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For the Schwarzschild chart, it is
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
L=\frac{1}{2}\left(\left(1-\frac{2m}{r}\right)\dot{t}^{2}-\frac{\dot{r}^{2}}{1-\frac{2m}{r}}-r^{2}\dot{\theta}^{2}-r^{2}\sin^{2}\theta\dot{\phi}^{2}\right)
\]

\end_inset

For radial infall, set 
\begin_inset Formula $\dot{\theta}=\dot{\phi}=0$
\end_inset

.
 The Euler-Lagrange equations are
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\frac{d}{d\tau}\frac{\partial L}{\partial\dot{x}^{\mu}}-\frac{\partial L}{\partial x^{\mu}}=0
\]

\end_inset

For 
\begin_inset Formula $x^{\mu}=t$
\end_inset

 one obviously has 
\begin_inset Formula $\partial L/\partial t=0$
\end_inset

 and so one has a constant of motion:
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\mbox{const}=\frac{\partial L}{\partial\dot{t}}
\]

\end_inset

Call this the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

energy
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Working this out explicitly, 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\mbox{const}=\frac{E}{m}=\frac{\partial L}{\partial\dot{t}}=\left(1-\frac{2m}{r}\right)\dot{t}
\]

\end_inset

This is writen so that the constant is dimensionless, and the energy 
\begin_inset Formula $E$
\end_inset

 has the same units as the mass.
 This eqn is the same as the previous section.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For 
\begin_inset Formula $x^{\mu}=r$
\end_inset

, the radial equation is brute-forced:
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\frac{\partial L}{\partial r}=\frac{m}{r^{2}}\dot{t}^{2}+\frac{\dot{r}^{2}}{\left(1-\frac{2m}{r}\right)^{2}}\frac{m}{r^{2}}
\]

\end_inset

Plugging in for the energy,
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\frac{\partial L}{\partial r}=\frac{m}{r^{2}\left(1-\frac{2m}{r}\right)^{2}}\left(\dot{r}^{2}+\frac{E^{2}}{m^{2}}\right)
\]

\end_inset

The momentum is
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
p_{r}=\frac{\partial L}{\partial\dot{r}}=-\frac{\dot{r}}{1-\frac{2m}{r}}
\]

\end_inset

and 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\frac{d}{d\tau}\frac{\partial L}{\partial\dot{r}}=-\frac{\ddot{r}}{1-\frac{2m}{r}}+\frac{\dot{r}^{2}}{\left(1-\frac{2m}{r}\right)^{2}}\frac{2m}{r^{2}}
\]

\end_inset

and so
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
0=\frac{d}{d\tau}\frac{\partial L}{\partial\dot{r}}-\frac{\partial L}{\partial r}=-\frac{\ddot{r}}{1-\frac{2m}{r}}+\frac{m}{r^{2}\left(1-\frac{2m}{r}\right)^{2}}\left(\dot{r}^{2}-\frac{E^{2}}{m^{2}}\right)
\]

\end_inset

Rearranging, 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
r^{2}\ddot{r}\left(1-\frac{2m}{r}\right)=m\left(\dot{r}^{2}-\frac{E^{2}}{m^{2}}\right)
\]

\end_inset

which is the same as the earlier eqn.
 So we got the same equation two different ways.
 Hurrah! I think it's correct.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Newtonian limit
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We can plug in for 
\begin_inset Formula $\dot{t}$
\end_inset

 in the Lagrangian to get
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
L=\frac{1}{2}\frac{1}{1-\frac{2m}{r}}\left(\frac{E^{2}}{m^{2}}-\dot{r}^{2}\right)
\]

\end_inset

Inserting this into the geodesic equation gives
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
r^{2}\ddot{r}=-2mL
\]

\end_inset

This can be directly compared to the Newtonian limit.
 This would be
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\ddot{r}=-\frac{Gm}{r^{2}}
\]

\end_inset

where 
\begin_inset Formula $G$
\end_inset

 was inserted explicitly, just to jog the memory.
 Of course, 
\begin_inset Formula $G=1$
\end_inset

 in our units.
 From this, one may conclude that 
\begin_inset Formula $L=1/2$
\end_inset

 for massive particles falling in the radial direction.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There's a second case, obtained by noting that 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\dot{r}=\pm\frac{E}{m}
\]

\end_inset

solves the geodesic equation, with 
\begin_inset Formula $\ddot{r}=0$
\end_inset

.
 Plugging through, one finds that 
\begin_inset Formula $L=0$
\end_inset

.
 Since the Lagrangian was explicitly constructed from the metric, one concludes
 that these are null geodesics.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Physical interpretation
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Why can 
\begin_inset Formula $L$
\end_inset

 be taken to be a constant along geodesics? Well, geodesics minimize arc
 length; this is the same as minimizing the energy, or minimizing the action.
 Note that 
\begin_inset Formula $H=L$
\end_inset

 for the Schwarschild metric, where 
\begin_inset Formula $H$
\end_inset

 is the Hamiltonian obtained from the Legendre transform above.
 Writing the total (square of the) arc length as
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\int Ld\tau
\]

\end_inset

it is clear that 
\begin_inset Formula $L=\mbox{const}$
\end_inset

 minimizes this.
 The shortest line between two points is a straight line; this remains the
 case, if one thinks of 
\begin_inset Formula $L\left(\tau\right)$
\end_inset

 as a plain-old ordinary real function of a single real parameter 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau$
\end_inset

.
 There's nothing more to it.
 A more precise and convincing formulation is given in Jost
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand cite
key "Jost2002geom"
literal "false"

\end_inset

, although Jost covers only the case for Riemannian manifolds.
 Close enough.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Note that 
\begin_inset Formula $L=1/2$
\end_inset

 corresponds to a line element of unit length.
 That is, all time-like tangent vectors always have unit length.
 This is merely a formality.
 The parameter 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau$
\end_inset

 is simply a real number that paramterizes distinct points along some arc
 (including, but not limited to geodesics.) As a parameter, one is free to
 reparmeterize 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau\to c\tau+\tau_{0}$
\end_inset

 for some constant 
\begin_inset Formula $c\ne1$
\end_inset

 and constant 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau_{0}$
\end_inset

 Such reparametrization does not change the arc itself.
 Thus, taking 
\begin_inset Formula $c=1$
\end_inset

 does not alter the arc itself.
 The constant 
\begin_inset Formula $c$
\end_inset

 is the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

speed
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 along the arc; for spacetime, we call it the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

speed of light
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 The paramter 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau$
\end_inset

 is called the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

proper time
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 in the physics literature, because 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau=t$
\end_inset

 in the free-falling frames.
 Thus, the parameterization of time-like geodesics to unit speed is merely
 an algebraic convenience, nothing more.
 Taking the Newtonian limit, as above, allows these arbitrary constants
 to be identified and given physical meaning.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For null geodesics, there's a common confusion abut the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

proper time
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 that should be noted.
 The radial geodesics with 
\begin_inset Formula $L=0$
\end_inset

 correspond to tangent vectors of zero length, according to the metric.
 This does not mean that that such tangent vectors cannot be integrated
 to obtain an arc.
 The paramter 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau$
\end_inset

 is still a valid parameter for locating points along the arc.
 Indeed, the radial coordinate is given by 
\begin_inset Formula $r=\dot{r}\tau$
\end_inset

 for the null geodesics.
 The only difficulty or confusion arises when the paramter 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau$
\end_inset

 is conflated with the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

time
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 It is not, nor is it measuring the arc length of null geodesics (the arc
 length is zero!).
 Thus, we should call 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau$
\end_inset

 the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

arc parameter
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 instead of the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

proper time
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 However, fighting tradition is hard, and this is not the battle for the
 moment.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
More generally, one can reparameterize 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau\to f\left(\tau\right)$
\end_inset

 for some diffeomorphism 
\begin_inset Formula $f:\mathbb{R}\to\mathbb{R}$
\end_inset

.
 Such a reparameterization does not change the location of arcs on a fixed
 manifold.
 If one beleives that physics is described only by the location of such
 arcs, then one considers the space of all arcs, modulo all diffeomorphisms
 of arc paramterizations.
 Working in this quotient space is the standard convention in (psuedo-)Riemannia
n geometry, as doing otherwise seems to lead only to more complicated situations
 that offer no particular insight into the geometry.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Another point to keep in mind is that the quantum formulation requires consideri
ng all arcs, and not just the geodesics.
 The Lagrangian is no longer a constant, and one performs path integrals
 (
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Feynmann integrals
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

) over all arcs, to obtain the partition function 
\begin_inset Formula $Z$
\end_inset

.
 These arcs also have 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau$
\end_inset

 as an arc parameter.
 This time, diffeomorphic reparameterizations 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau\to f\left(\tau\right)$
\end_inset

 cause the Lagrangian to change as 
\begin_inset Formula $L\to L\dot{f}^{2}$
\end_inset

.
 For conventional QFT in curved spacetimes, I beleive that the intent is
 to use a measure for the path integrals that is invariant under such reparamete
rizations.
 I beleive that the intent of string theory is to allow such reparamterizations,
 and to give them dynamics.
 That is, string theory is not so much about little itty-bitty strings having
 some spatial extent, but rather, even for a fixed arc on a fixed manifold,
 one must consider such reparameterizations.
 That is, sometimes the two endpoints of an open string correspond to the
 same point on the arc, and sometimes to different points on the same arc,
 and sometimes to different points on different arcs.
 At least, I think that is the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

intended
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 interpretation of string theory, although I am quite sure there are thousands
 of people out there willing to shout at me about how wrong I am.
 Sigh.
 So it goes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
The energy
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The above manipulations expose a constant of motion, 
\begin_inset Formula $E/m$
\end_inset

.
 The physical interpretation of this remains unclear.
 For the timelike geodesics, a simple solution can be obtained if 
\begin_inset Formula $E=m$
\end_inset

, but otherwise the equations look difficult to solve.
 Should I assume that the solutions for 
\begin_inset Formula $E\ne m$
\end_inset

 ar equivalent to those for 
\begin_inset Formula $E=m$
\end_inset

 after appropriate Lorentz transformations? If so, this is not obvious.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For the null geodesics, where 
\begin_inset Formula $\dot{r}=\mbox{const}$
\end_inset

 it is clear that 
\begin_inset Formula $E/m$
\end_inset

 is nothing more than a linear reparametrization of the arc parameter 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau$
\end_inset

, and so one can set 
\begin_inset Formula $E=m$
\end_inset

 without any loss of generality.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Timelike radial geodesics
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Presuming that 
\begin_inset Formula $L=1/2$
\end_inset

 is a constant, the radial geodesic equation becomes 
\begin_inset Formula $r^{2}\ddot{r}=-m$
\end_inset

.
 Reinserting this into the earlier form gives
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\dot{r}^{2}=\frac{2m}{r}+\frac{E^{2}}{m^{2}}-1
\]

\end_inset

The same form can be found with the Ansatz
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
\dot{r}\ddot{r}= & \frac{1}{2}\frac{d}{d\tau}\dot{r}^{2}\\
= & -\frac{m\dot{r}}{r^{2}}\\
= & \frac{d}{d\tau}\frac{m}{r}
\end{align*}

\end_inset

Integrating this gives 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\dot{r}^{2}=\frac{2m}{r}+A
\]

\end_inset

with a constant of integration 
\begin_inset Formula $A=E^{2}/m^{2}-1$
\end_inset

.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The simplest way to solve this is to solve for 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau\left(r\right)$
\end_inset

 and then invert, rather than trying to get to 
\begin_inset Formula $r\left(\tau\right)$
\end_inset

 directly.
 This is done by integrating 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\frac{d\tau}{dr}=\pm\sqrt{\frac{r}{2m+Ar}}
\]

\end_inset

For now, set 
\begin_inset Formula $A=0$
\end_inset

; the case for 
\begin_inset Formula $A\ne0$
\end_inset

 isn't currently examined.
 Integrating this directly gives
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\tau=\tau\left(r\right)=\tau_{0}\pm\frac{2}{3}\frac{1}{\sqrt{2m}}\left(r^{3/2}-r_{0}^{3/2}\right)
\]

\end_inset

where 
\begin_inset Formula $r_{0}=r\left(p,\tau_{0}\right)$
\end_inset

 is the initial position of flashlight 
\begin_inset Formula $p$
\end_inset

 at initial time 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau_{0}$
\end_inset

.
 The infalling geodesic corresponds to the choice of the minus sign, so
 that 
\begin_inset Formula $r<r_{0}$
\end_inset

 results in increasing proper time 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau>\tau_{0}$
\end_inset

.
 Inverting this gives the rather busy expression
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
r\left(\tau\right)=\left[r_{0}^{3/2}-\frac{3\sqrt{2m}}{2}\left(\tau-\tau_{0}\right)\right]^{2/3}
\]

\end_inset

Curiously, this expression is not singular at 
\begin_inset Formula $r=2m$
\end_inset

.
 However, the integral providing the coordinate 
\begin_inset Formula $t$
\end_inset

 does exhibit a pole at that point.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
An expression for 
\begin_inset Formula $t\left(\tau\right)$
\end_inset

 can be obtained by direct integration.
 Starting from
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\frac{E}{m}=\left(1-\frac{2m}{r}\right)\dot{t}
\]

\end_inset

the time coordinate is
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
t\left(\tau\right)= & \frac{E}{m}\int_{\tau_{0}}^{\tau}\frac{r\left(s\right)}{r\left(s\right)-2m}ds\\
= & \frac{E}{m}\left[\int_{\tau_{0}}^{\tau}ds+2m\int_{\tau_{0}}^{\tau}\frac{ds}{r\left(s\right)-2m}\right]
\end{align*}

\end_inset

Hmm.
 We can try to brute-force the second integral, but that seems tedious.
 A change of variable seems to be easier.
 Write
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\frac{d\tau}{dr}=\frac{dt}{dr}\frac{d\tau}{dt}=-\sqrt{\frac{r}{2m}}
\]

\end_inset

so
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\frac{dt}{dr}=-\dot{t}\sqrt{\frac{r}{2m}}=-\frac{1}{1-\frac{2m}{r}}\sqrt{\frac{r}{2m}}
\]

\end_inset

where 
\begin_inset Formula $E=m$
\end_inset

 is taken because that was already assumed for the expression for 
\begin_inset Formula $\dot{r}$
\end_inset

 up above.
 Integrating, 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
t\left(r\right)=-\int_{r_{0}}^{r}\sqrt{\frac{r}{2m}}\frac{1}{1-\frac{2m}{r}}dr
\]

\end_inset

Yuck.
 Change of variable, 
\begin_inset Formula $x=\sqrt{2m/r}$
\end_inset

 so 
\begin_inset Formula $r=2m/x^{2}$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $dr=-4mdx/x^{3}$
\end_inset

 so
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
-\int\sqrt{\frac{r}{2m}}\frac{1}{1-\frac{2m}{r}}dr= & 4m\int\frac{dx}{x^{4}\left(1-x^{2}\right)}\\
= & 4m\left[\int\frac{dx}{x^{4}}+\int\frac{dx}{x^{2}\left(1-x^{2}\right)}\right]\\
= & 4m\left[\int\frac{dx}{x^{4}}+\int\frac{dx}{x^{2}}+\int\frac{dx}{1-x^{2}}\right]\\
= & 4m\left[-\frac{1}{3x^{3}}-\frac{1}{x}-\frac{1}{2}\log\left|\frac{1-x}{1+x}\right|\right]\\
= & -4m\left[\frac{r}{6m}\sqrt{\frac{r}{2m}}+\sqrt{\frac{r}{2m}}+\frac{1}{2}\log\left|\frac{1-\sqrt{2m/r}}{1+\sqrt{2m/r}}\right|\right]\\
= & -\frac{2}{3}\left(r+6m\right)\sqrt{\frac{r}{2m}}-2m\log\left|\frac{1-\sqrt{2m/r}}{1+\sqrt{2m/r}}\right|
\end{align*}

\end_inset

which is a bit tedious.
 Concluding, one has
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
t\left(r\right)=\left.\frac{2}{3}\left(r+6m\right)\sqrt{\frac{r}{2m}}+2m\log\left|\frac{1-\sqrt{2m/r}}{1+\sqrt{2m/r}}\right|\right|_{r}^{r_{0}}
\]

\end_inset

where we've gotten rid of the minus sign by exchanging the limits of the
 evaluation.
 This works, because 
\begin_inset Formula $r_{0}>r$
\end_inset

 and so the 
\begin_inset Formula $t$
\end_inset

 coordinate is increasing as 
\begin_inset Formula $r$
\end_inset

 decreases.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Null radial geodesics
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As noted earlier, 
\begin_inset Formula $\dot{r}=\pm E/m=\mbox{const.}$
\end_inset

 also provides a solution.
 Since 
\begin_inset Formula $L=0$
\end_inset

 in this case, this solution corresponds to null geodesics.
 Since the solutions to this equation are just arcs with constant arc velocity,
 one can set 
\begin_inset Formula $E/m=1$
\end_inset

 without any loss of generality.
 Integrating, one has
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
r\left(\tau\right)=r_{f}\pm\left(\tau-\tau_{f}\right)
\]

\end_inset

for the radial coordinate.
 The pair 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t_{f},r_{f}\right)$
\end_inset

 are the flashlight coordinates, at the time that a flashlight emits it's
 signal.
 The proper time 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau_{f}$
\end_inset

 is the proper time of the flashlight (and is encoded in the flashlight
 transmission).
 With this offset, the arc parameter 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau$
\end_inset

 continues to measure from 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau_{0}$
\end_inset

 when the flashlight was dropped.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For the time coordinate, proceed much as before, by flipping over the coordinate
s
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\frac{d\tau}{dr}=\frac{dt}{dr}\frac{d\tau}{dt}=\pm1
\]

\end_inset

so
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\frac{dt}{dr}=\pm\dot{t}=\pm\frac{1}{1-\frac{2m}{r}}
\]

\end_inset

The integration proceeds as before, i.e.
 tediously:
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
t\left(r\right)=\pm\int_{r_{f}}^{r}\frac{dr}{1-2m/r}
\]

\end_inset

Performing a change of variable 
\begin_inset Formula $y=2m/r$
\end_inset

 or 
\begin_inset Formula $r=2m/y$
\end_inset

 so that 
\begin_inset Formula $dr=-2mdy/y^{2}$
\end_inset

 gives 
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
\int\frac{dr}{1-2m/r}= & -2m\int\frac{dy}{y^{2}\left(1-y\right)}\\
= & -2m\left[\int\frac{dy}{y^{2}}+\int\frac{dy}{y}+\int\frac{dy}{1-y}\right]\\
= & -2m\left[-\frac{1}{y}+\log y\mp_{EH}\log\left|1-y\right|\right]\\
= & 2m\left[\frac{r}{2m}+\log\frac{r}{2m}\pm_{EH}\log\left|1-\frac{2m}{r}\right|\right]\\
= & r\pm_{EH}2m\log\left|\frac{r}{2m}-1\right|
\end{align*}

\end_inset

where 
\begin_inset Formula $\pm_{EH}$
\end_inset

 is a horizon-dependent sign: take the upper sign when 
\begin_inset Formula $2m<r$
\end_inset

 and the lower when 
\begin_inset Formula $2m>r$
\end_inset

.
 This is basically a cheap hack to allow us to continue working with interior
 solutions without having to go over to other coordinate systems (yet; we'll
 do this eventually).
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In conclusion, the 
\begin_inset Formula $t$
\end_inset

 coordinate for null geodesics is given by
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
t\left(r\right)=\pm\left.r\pm_{EH}2m\log\left|\frac{r}{2m}-1\right|\right|_{r_{f}}^{r}
\]

\end_inset

The first 
\begin_inset Formula $\pm$
\end_inset

 uses the upper sign for outgoing geodesics, and the lower sign for infalling
 geodesics.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Thought experiment
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For the thought experiment as posed, there are only two relevant cases:
 the radially outgoing geodesics, emitted by some flashlight directly in
 front of the observer, and the radially ingoing geodesics, emitted by some
 flashlight directly behind the observer.
 Specifically, the goal here is to determine what the observer sees, to
 track the progress of these two geodesics to the observers eyes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Thus, consider a signal transmitted at coordinate 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t_{f},r_{f}\right)$
\end_inset

, where 
\begin_inset Formula $f$
\end_inset

 denotes the flashlight parameters (the flashlight's proper time and UUID.)
 The signal is to be received at the location 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t_{a},r_{a}\right)$
\end_inset

, with the subscript 
\begin_inset Formula $a$
\end_inset

 denoting the astronaut.
 The signal encodes the flashlights proper time and UUID; we wish to determine
 what these are, when they are received.
 In addition, we'd like to know what the redshift is.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Since both the flashlights and the astronaut start falling at the same time,
 it is enough to use geodesic variation to obtain their relative positions.
 Initially, they are separated by 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(\delta t_{0},\delta r_{0}\right)$
\end_inset

.
 After both fall for an equal amount of proper time 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau$
\end_inset

, they end up separated by 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(\delta t,\delta r\right)$
\end_inset

, at which point, the flashlight emits a signal.
 The astronaut continues to fall for an addtional 
\begin_inset Formula $\Delta\tau$
\end_inset

 in proper time, before receiving the signal.
 What is 
\begin_inset Formula $\Delta\tau$
\end_inset

? This can be computed by incrementing the proper time on the astronaut
 until the distance between flashlight and astronaut is zero.
 That is, we solve for the intersection point between the null geodesic
 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t_{n},r_{n}\right)$
\end_inset

 and the astronaut 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t_{a},r_{a}\right)$
\end_inset

.
 That is, 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t_{n},r_{n}\right)=\left(t_{a},r_{a}\right)$
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let's try to put this all together.
 Just cut-n-paste the earlier formulas.
 Although it's quite the mess.
 So 
\begin_inset Formula $\delta t_{0}=0$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $t_{0}=\tau_{0}=0$
\end_inset

 as the infall begins all at the same time in the lab frame.
 The location of the forward flashlight is 
\begin_inset Formula $\delta r_{0}<0$
\end_inset

 because it starts closer to the BH.
 After proper time 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau_{f}$
\end_inset

, this flaslight is located at 
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
r_{f}\left(\tau_{f}\right) & =\left[\left(r_{0}+\delta r_{0}\right)^{3/2}-\frac{3\sqrt{2m}}{2}\tau_{f}\right]^{2/3}\\
t_{f}\left(r_{f}\right) & =\left.\frac{2}{3}\left(r+6m\right)\sqrt{\frac{r}{2m}}+2m\log\left|\frac{1-\sqrt{2m/r}}{1+\sqrt{2m/r}}\right|\right|_{r_{f}}^{r_{0}+\delta r_{0}}
\end{align*}

\end_inset

The null geodesic propagates up, away from the BH, as
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
r_{n}\left(\tau_{n}\right) & =r_{f}+\left(\tau_{n}-\tau_{f}\right)\\
t_{n}\left(r_{n}\right) & =t_{f}\left(r_{f}\right)+\left.r\pm_{EH}2m\log\left|\frac{r}{2m}-1\right|\right|_{r_{f}}^{r_{n}}\\
 & =t_{f}\left(r_{f}\right)+r_{n}-r_{f}\pm_{r_{n}}2m\log\left|\frac{r_{n}}{2m}-1\right|\pm_{r_{f}}2m\log\left|\frac{r_{f}}{2m}-1\right|
\end{align*}

\end_inset

which must equal
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
r_{a}\left(\tau_{a}\right) & =\left[r_{0}^{3/2}-\frac{3\sqrt{2m}}{2}\tau_{a}\right]^{2/3}\\
t_{a}\left(r_{a}\right) & =\left.\frac{2}{3}\left(r+6m\right)\sqrt{\frac{r}{2m}}+2m\log\left|\frac{1-\sqrt{2m/r}}{1+\sqrt{2m/r}}\right|\right|_{r_{a}}^{r_{0}}
\end{align*}

\end_inset

One can immediately set 
\begin_inset Formula $r_{n}\left(\tau_{n}\right)=r_{a}\left(\tau_{a}\right)$
\end_inset

 to eliminate the arc parameter 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau_{n}$
\end_inset

 from further consideration.
 This leaves 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau_{a}$
\end_inset

 as a free parameter.
 Equivalently, 
\begin_inset Formula $r_{a}$
\end_inset

 can be taken as the free parameter, and so one solves for 
\begin_inset Formula $t_{n}\left(r_{a}\right)=t_{a}\left(r_{a}\right)$
\end_inset

.
 This looks algebraically daunting, and needs to be solved numerically.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Example values
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Lets work out two examples: solar mass BH and SagA* mass.
 For units, use seconds.
 Viz.
 Earth is eight light-minutes away from the Sun, so this seems like an intuitive
 timescale.
 Table of values:
\begin_inset VSpace defskip
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\align center
\begin_inset Tabular
<lyxtabular version="3" rows="13" columns="2">
<features tabularvalignment="middle">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top">
<row>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Param
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
SI
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset Formula $G$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset Formula $6.674\times10^{-11}\mbox{m}^{3}\mbox{kg}^{-1}\mbox{s}^{-2}$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset Formula $c$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset Formula $2.998\times10^{8}\mbox{m}\mbox{s}^{-1}$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset Formula $G/c^{2}$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset Formula $7.425\times10^{-28}\mbox{m}\mbox{kg}^{-1}$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset Formula $G/c^{3}$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset Formula $2.477\times10^{-36}\mbox{s}\mbox{kg}^{-1}$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset Formula $M_{\astrosun}$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset Formula $2\times10^{30}\mbox{kg}$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset Formula $M_{\astrosun}G/c^{3}$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset Formula $4.953\times10^{-6}\mbox{s}$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset Formula $R_{\oplus}$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset Formula $1.496\times10^{11}\mbox{m}$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset Formula $R_{\oplus}/c$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset Formula $499\mbox{s}$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset Formula $M_{\mbox{Sgr A*}}$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset Formula $8.26\times10^{36}\mbox{kg}$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset Formula $M_{\mbox{Sgr A*}}G/c^{3}$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset Formula $20.5\mbox{s}$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset Formula $M_{87}$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset Formula $7\times10^{9}M_{\astrosun}$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset Formula $M_{87}G/c^{3}$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset Formula $3.5\times10^{4}\mbox{s}$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
</lyxtabular>

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\align center
\begin_inset VSpace defskip
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This can be summarized with just one remark: 
\begin_inset Formula $m=1$
\end_inset

 corresponds to about 201900 solar masses.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Flashlight coordinates (in the Lemaitre chart)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Should be much easier.
 The general idea is the use the Lemaitre chart, hoping that the free-fall
 frames are easier to deal with.
 But then, to perform the null geodesic calculations, we should swtich to
 a different coordinate chart, to keep that easy.
 Can we get away with this plan?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Flashlight fierbeins
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For each flashlight, we also need an expression for its local inertial coordinat
e frame.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Null geodesics
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To compute the redshift of each flashlight (relative to the observer), we'll
 need the geodesic variation.
 See Weinberg, chapter one.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For a general treament, see 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand cite
key "Cieslik2022"
literal "false"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Appendix A
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Stuff we don't need yet.
 Eventually we'll need it.
 Stuff copied from assorted places.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Lemaître frame
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
First, the Lemaître frame for Schwarszchild.
 This frame is for a freely-falling, non-spinning point particle.
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
\vec{f}_{0} & =\partial_{T}-\sqrt{\frac{2m}{r}}\partial_{r}\\
\vec{f}_{1} & =\partial_{r}\\
\vec{f}_{2} & =\frac{1}{r}\partial_{\theta}\\
\vec{f}_{3} & =\frac{1}{r\sin\theta}\partial_{\phi}
\end{align*}

\end_inset

where 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
ds^{2}=dT^{2}-\left(dr+\sqrt{\frac{2m}{r}}dT\right)^{2}-r^{2}\left(d\theta^{2}+\sin^{2}\theta\,d\phi^{2}\right)
\]

\end_inset

Note that for constant 
\begin_inset Formula $T$
\end_inset

 (by abuse of notation, 
\begin_inset Formula $dT=0$
\end_inset

) the spatial part of the metric is the flat-space metric.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The free-fall frame is given by 
\begin_inset Formula $dr+\sqrt{\frac{2m}{r}}dT=0$
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Factoids: 
\begin_inset Formula $T$
\end_inset

 is the proper time 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau$
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Except this is not the Lemaitre frame, this is the Painleve frame, almost
 the same, but ...
 clarify.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Relation to Schwarschild coords
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let 
\begin_inset Formula $t$
\end_inset

 be the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

time at infinity
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, i.e.
 the Schwarschild time.
 The relation between 
\begin_inset Formula $T$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $t$
\end_inset

 is the Gullstrand–Painlevé chart is
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
t\left(T,r\right) & =T+\int\frac{\sqrt{2m/r}}{1-2m/r}dr\\
 & =T-2m\left(2y-\log\left(\frac{y-1}{y+1}\right)\right)
\end{align*}

\end_inset

with 
\begin_inset Formula $y=\sqrt{r/2m}$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $0<r<\infty$
\end_inset

.
 The log hits the branch point at 
\begin_inset Formula $r=2m$
\end_inset

; this is the coordinate singularity in the Schwarschild chart.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset CommandInset bibtex
LatexCommand bibtex
btprint "btPrintCited"
bibfiles "/home/linas/src/fractal/paper/gr"
options "tufte"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
