#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\usepackage{slashed}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "cmtt" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Free-falling Flashlights and Observers:
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

Part Five of the Ergodicity/Entropy series
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepstas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
6 October 2023
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
This is a continuation of Part Three: a description of free-falling flashlights
 and observers.
 The goal here is to solve the general case, for the Schwarzschild solution,
 but in coordinates valid across the event horizon.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Overview
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The general discussion can be found in Part Three; I'll just recap here.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A traditional analysis of the Schwarzschild solution involves a calculation
 that demonstrates what the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

fixed stars
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 look like to a freely-falling, infalling observer.
 The current project is to update this, and consider the case of flashlights
 that are also freely falling, 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

near to
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 the observer.
 What does the observer see, as he and the flashlights cross the event horizon?
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The flashlight is taken to be a smart radio device that can communicate
 the flashlight state and encode it in a radio signal.
 It's 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

smart
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, in that it's a computer, able to track it's own position and orientation
 in a given coordinate chart (using dead reckoning).
 This info is continuously broadcast, encoded in a radio signal.
 Being electromagnetic, it travels along a null geodesic, until it intersects
 with the observer (is received by the observer.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Encoded information should include:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The proper time, as perceived by the flashlight.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The coordinates of the flashlight, at the time that it emitted the signal.
 These coordinates are expressed in whatever coordinate system is convenient.
 Currently, Gullstrand–Painlevé coordinates seem like a good choice; see
 below.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The 4-velocity of the flashlight, at the time of the signal emission.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The direction the flashlight was facing, plus it's roll: all three Euler
 angles (pitch-yaw-roll, or whatever coord system is being employed.) The
 flashlight should transmit vertically-polarized light; this provides the
 roll reference frame directly, to the receiver.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
A UUID number, uniquely identifying that flashlight, so we do not confuse
 it with others radiating along the same null geodesic.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Optionally, the initial location and velocity of the flashlight.
 That is, the flashlight is assumed to start falling freely only after it
 has been boosted into some particular trajectory.
 The starting point can be anywhere outside the event horizon.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The observer likewise falls freely, after being boosted to some initial
 starting trajectory.
 The observer looks at the flashlight, and makes a note of the signal that
 it is receiving.
 This includes:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The direction from which the flashlight signal came from.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The polarization of the flashlight signal.
 This measures any twisting in the of the reference frame as the null geodesic
 propagates.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The brightness of the flashlight.
 That is, given that a flashlight radiates uniformly in all directions,
 how many of these rays fall onto the receiver of a small, fixed solid angle?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The redshift of the flashlight signal; the dispersion.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Both the flashlight and the observer fall with time-like geodesics.
 The flashlight signal follows a null geodesic, of course.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This scenario can be generalized to one of an boserver falling together
 with a cloud of freely-falling 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

smart dust
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

: a distribution of such flashlights, flying every-which way.
 We wish to observe and analyze the plethora of incomging signals: to make
 a movie of what the observer sees, in the observer's proper time.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The introduction of a dust adds several more observables to the problem:
 for a given distribution of the dust, what is the distribution that the
 observer sees? This question about the distribution density can also be
 asked of brightness, polarization and redshift.
 In particular, it's been noted that the event horizon weakly traps null
 geodesics, emited in the distant past, but neither infalling nor outgoing.
 This suggests that a bright caustic forms at the event horizon.
 How bright is it? Can we provide closed-form solutions for it?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Plan
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So far, this is all very easy to say, in words.
 There are several hard parts, here.
 These are:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Restate the above in terms of generic statements about maps of tangent spaces
 on the tangent manifold of the Schwarzschild solution.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Write down the needed encodings in appropriate coords.
 Several choices of coords are possible: Lemaître coordinates, Eddington–Finkels
tein coordinates, etc.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Solve the null geodesics.
 This will almost surely require numeric integration; the earlier by-hand
 efforts proved to be difficult even in the very simplest case, of radial
 infall.
 This means writing code.
 Yuck.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Convert all of this info into a ray-traced movie that can be watched.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Then, there is a meta-question: is the above effort worth it? Given the
 difficulty of doing it, what do we learn that we might not already guess
 from general, well-known properties of the Schwarzschild spacetime?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This meta-question is posed because this text is more of a diary than a
 publication, and I'm wondering if I'm wasting my time, and should work
 on something else...
 and yet...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Motivation
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The goal is to get some insight into the firewall problem.
 Lets recap this, in the most naive way possible.
 Some(?) classic GR texts ask 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

what happens when an astronaut falls through the event horizon?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and then provide an answer: not much, for a galactic-sized black hole.
 This argument rests on the idea that tidal forces are small/un-noticable,
 and that the lab frame is approximately flat, ergo nothing happens.
 This argument seems entirely self-consistent.
 Mathematically, we imagine some tangent plane (that defines the lab frame)
 falling across the horizon, and all is fine.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is contradicted by another thought experiment.
 Suppose the astronaut is carrying a head-lamp, that illuminates his hands
 and feet, so he can 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

see what he's doing
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Perhaps wearing a glow-in-the-dark suit.
 Suppose he dives, hands first, so that the hands cross the EH before the
 eyes.
 Can he see his hands? Well, he should not be able to, as they are on the
 other side of the EH.
 There aren't any null outgoing geodesics.
 Once his head crosses the EH, can he see his hands again? Is there a breif
 blink, after which he can see normally again? I think not; I think they
 remain dark.
 From what I can tell, null geodesics cannot come back up towards the EH;
 they have fallen into the future, and stay there.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This second picture is deeply disturbing for survivability.
 Lets replace the astronaut by a robot, so we can talk about mechanical
 properties.
 Consider a steel arm, that gets it's rigidity from atomic forces.
 Rigid motion propagates at the speed of sound, which is determined by the
 Young's modulus for steel, and we can hand wave 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

its electromagnetic forces between the atoms
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, whatever that means.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Consider a pair of robot arms, forming a clamp, pushing against one-another.
 Presume the point being compressed falls first through the EH, and the
 spring applying tension falls last.
 It would appear that the robot's arms, having crossed the EH, must suffer
 mechanical failure, as no stress signal can propagate back up the bar of
 steel.
 The EH would appear to erase all shear forces; it seems to be a perfectly
 frictionless surface slicing everything that goes through it.
 The steel gets foliated, the foliations do not have any shear forces between
 them, and must necessarily displace to alleviate shear stress.
 So, somewhat like a fluid, except its a foliation.
 Tensile stresses also cannot propagate across the EH.
 Between these two effects, any 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

real material
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 would get shredded (ignoring QM effects.) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In terms of reference frames, I think it's correct to say that the arm has
 rotated into the future, and causality is such that the future cannot affect
 the past.
 That is, each foliation cannot see the foliation in front of it, because
 there are no null geodesics that can travel from it, to the folations further
 back.
 This is the same as what happens in flat space: objects in the future cannot
 send signals to the past; there are no forward-travelling null geodesics
 from the future to the past.
 As this is what is happening inside the EH, we conclude that the forward
 slices are in the future from the ones behind them.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This reasoning goes down to the atomic scales: it seems the foliation–shredding
 happens at the atomic scale.
 This is, I presume, the origin of the firewall idea.
 But it seems entirely at odds with the idea that the lab frame falls unharmed
 through the EH.
 So which is it? Studying the infall of smart dust seems to be the way to
 do it.
 We want a complete picture of signal propagation as a signaling network
 falls through the event horizon.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Fields
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Before moving forwards, I wish to pause and pose a few more questions and
 speculations.
 The above has been posed purely in terms of particle dynamics.
 Is there a corresponding wave picture? There are a handful of differential
 equations that are relativisitcally invariant: the Laplace eqn (for light),
 the Klien-Gordon eqn, the Dirac eqn, the Majorona and Weyl equations.
 Solutions to these equations are 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

classical
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

; no quantum mechanics is involved in writing down their solutions.
 What do these look like in the vicinity of the event horizon? It would
 seem that there's a tension between the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

nothing happens because tangent planes are flat
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 viewpoint, and the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

space-like surfaces have rotated to become timelike, and thus shred everything
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 viewpoint.
 I find this deeply confusing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Of course, there is a pat answer for this: pretend the spacetime is a fixed
 manifold; write down the equations on such a curved manifold, and just
 solve them, over the entire spacetime.
 In this view the solutions are static: they don't change with time; they
 are everywhere on the manifold; they are just fields, stuck like paint,
 to the manifold.
 There is no 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

time
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, there's no causality; there's just some coordinate charts, and some time-like
 geodesics going every-which way.
 There's no paradox, here, no confusion, in this view.
 The solutions are eternal, everything is pre-destined, there is no free
 will.
 There's just an arrangement of fields.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
QM
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The issue raised above is that we need to somehow convert the concept of
 these solutions of well-know relativistically-covariant equations into
 statements about atomic forces, of actual molecules with covalent bonds,
 able to propagate shear stress, compression and tension along those molecular
 bonds.
 What does molecular chemistry look like, at the EH? How was the EH able
 to provide a frictionless surface that erases shear stress and tension?
 (Does it still propagate compression? Into the future, from the past?)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
How should one think of the hydrogen atom falling through the EH? Naively,
 one can pick the rest frame of the free-falling nucleus, and work with
 the Schroedinger equation in that frame.
 The nucleus follows a time-like geodesic; this geodesic can be labelled
 with a proper time, and it defines sequence of unique space-like tangent
 planes (which are flat, by definition).
 For a galactic-sized BH, we can approximate space-like foliations by these
 tangent planes.
 The Schroedinger equation has two forms: one time-dependent and one static,
 time-independent.
 One converts from the first to the second by promtly discarding an 
\begin_inset Formula $\exp-i\omega t$
\end_inset

 term, and then demonstrates solutions for the static eqn.
 In the free-falling frame, it would seem nothing happens to the hydrogen
 atom; it continues as normal.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What about a benzene ring? It has shear forces locked up in the bonds.
 In the free-falling frame, what happens? Nothing at all, because we are
 working with static solutions in a nice flat foliation? In what way are
 photons involved in the storage of of those shear forces?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What are the vibrational modes of a water molecule as it crosses the EH?
 As it vibrates, it can emit a microwave photon.
 When is this photon emitted? Where does it go?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
These thought experiments suggest that the solutions to the Laplace equation
 (which describe 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

real
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 photon fields) might resemble those of quantum tunneling: that there is
 some tail, that pokes out of the EH.
 Perhaps that tunneling tail can couple to things outside the EH; is this
 how the microsocpic form of Hawking radiation arises? Surely I am not the
 first to ask such questions; it will take some work to find the answers,
 though.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Two-slit experiment
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What happens if we drop a macorsopic-sized double-slit interfermoeter through
 the EH? Hmm.
 This might not be that hard ...
 If we drop source-first, the slits will red-shift away at the horizon,
 and the diffraction pattern will become redder.
 But what about the waves coming up from those slits, just before it crossed
 the EH? As they redshift, the wavelengths get longer, and so the interference
 pattern spreads out.
 The wave might have been quite blue as it passed the slits, but it must
 red-shift as it travels up.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So, this is again a question of what solutins to the Laplace eqns look like,
 just uphill of the EH.
 Again, I assume someone has asked and answered this question before?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Caustics
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Some speculation about the caustic of null geodesics at the event horizon.
 Can this mechanism be used to provide quantum entanglement? That is, to
 resolve the big-boy-physics problem of the firewall, do these null geodesics
 provide the needed basis for entanglement, so that the radiated quantum
 state matches what fell in? I don't yet know how to even approach this
 question, yet.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Mechanical engineering
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

robot dust
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 model can be used to explore certain questions of mechanical engineering
 at the event horizon.
 Suppose each dust particle can communicate with it's neighbors (using light
 signals) and has a small thruster that can accelerate in arbitrary directions.
 How is this communicatins network disrupted, as it falls through the event
 horizon? What sort of maneuvability problems are encountered? Specifically,
 this robot dust could be programmed to mimic a bar of steel, or a structure
 under tension or compression.
 This mimicry helps disconnect questions about the bulk modulus of solids
 (where stresses propagate at the speed of sound) from the detailed quantum
 mechanics of molecular forces in molecular bonds.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Problem Setup
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There are several levels of questions here.
 Best to sort these into a plan of attack.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
First, and most direct: given a point on the manifold (the observer), and
 a time-like geodesic (the flashlight), does there exist a null geodesic
 that connects the observer to some point on the flashlight geodesic? If
 so, where? Is it pointing in the correct direction? That is, is the flashlight
 in the past of the observer?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
It would seem that the Schwazschild horizon disrupts such null geodesics;
 and once they are disrupted, they stay disrupted.
 This implies that the observer has a perceived horizon: viewing angles
 and directions from which no null geodesics arrive.
 This is a dynamic, perceptual horizon for the observer.
 What is the shape of this horizon? Is there any sense in which it is a
 caustic, i.e.
 the result of multiple horizons accumulating in one place? Perhaps such
 a caustic might occur if the observer is looking sideways as he falls;
 are there a bunch of horizons that condense at the sides?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
If we can answer the first question in the affirmative, then we have two
 points on the manifold: one for the observer, one for the flashlight, connected
 by a null geodesic.
 This implies that any other flashlight geodesic that passes through the
 second point is also perceivable by the observer.
 That is, we have full access to the time-like tangent plane located at
 the second point.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
How does the null relation evolve over time? The is, as the observer steps
 forward in proper time by 
\begin_inset Formula $\Delta\tau$
\end_inset

, where does the observer's backward-looking light-cone intersect the the
 flashlight? What is the corresponding 
\begin_inset Formula $\Delta t$
\end_inset

 for the flashlight?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The above question should be phrased for the entire time-like tangent plane:
 There's a flashlight for each tangent vector, travelling in a different
 direction, with a different velocity.
 Each of these forms a geodesic; are each of these visible to the observer?
 If not, then we have a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

dynamic horizon
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 that has cut off visibility.
 For the remaining, still-visible tangnet geodesics, we want to obtain the
 corresponding 
\begin_inset Formula $\Delta t$
\end_inset

.
 The ratio 
\begin_inset Formula $\Delta t/\Delta\tau$
\end_inset

 is the redshift, perceived by the observer.
 I assume that it is always the case that horizons are characterized by
 infinite redshifts.
 The hand-waving argument for this is continuity: Everything about this
 geometry is continuous (differentiable, even smooth) so in order to get
 from visible to invisible, one must push both redshift to infinity and
 brightness to zero.
 Exact expressions for redshift and brightness are desirable, but will presumabl
y be too difficult to obtain analytically, and so will require numeric work.
 Alas.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To answer the question in the very first bullet, it seems easiest to instead
 describe the past lightcone of the observer.
 This is a manifold, the past null manifold.
 Then, for each point on this past null manifold, we ask for the time-like
 tangents to it.
 These are the flashlights instantaneously passing through that point.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
At the observer's location, there is a time-like tangent plane.
 This is the collection of all possible velocities that the observer can
 have.
 For each pair of (observer velocity, flashlight velocity), we ask for the
 redshift.
 If the redshift is infinite, or has changed sign, we say that this flashlight
 tangent vector is beyond the current dynamic horizon of the given observer
 tangent vector.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To obtain the past light-cone of the observer, we start with the null tangent
 plane of the observer.
 This is the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

movie screen
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 on which the observations of the past plays out.
 It is two-dimensional, characterized by sphere coords.
 We get the full past light cone by integrating along each direction.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There are several potentially confusing aspects to the proposed program
 above:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The past null lightcone will, in general, intersect itself.
 This is because certain null geodesics can orbit the BH, and thus take
 multiple different paths to get to the same point.
 When there is more than one null geodesic connecting two points, there
 will (always?) be a countable infinity of such null geodesics (this is
 the gravitational lensing effect.) This confusion can be avoided by noting
 that, by fixing one given null direction, integrating along that path gives
 one single unique null geodesic; there is no ambiguity as to 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

where it goes
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
If we fix an exterior point, and examine the time-like tangent space, it
 will contain, in general, vectors that, when integrated, will give geodesics
 that orbit the BH, as well as flyby geodesics that return to infinity.
 Only a subset of the geodesics integrated from this tangent space actually
 fall into the singularity.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This second point suggests that, to keep things simple, we should stick
 to radially infalling flashlights and observers, for now.
 Well see how it goes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, I guess that's the complete problem setup, then.
 Time to roll up the sleeves and get to work.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Coordinate Charts
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The background space-time manifold is that of the Schwarzschild solution.
 We need to select coordinates that are geodesically complete past the future
 Schwarzschild event horizon, and are easy to work with.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We have several choices.
 Listing these, with the pros and cons:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Schwarzschild coordinates.
 Unacceptable, due ot the coordinate singularity at the (future) event horizon.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Lemaître coordinates.
 Minor modification to Schwarzschild.
 Disadvantage: square roots and cube roots appear.
 Not geodesically complete.
 Advantage: the frame fields describe the a radially free-falling observer,
 falling from infinity.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates.
 These are a coordinate frame defined by radially infalling null geodesics.
 Advantage: the metric is independent of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

time
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Disadvantage: Not geodesically complete.
 Specifically, doesn't cover the past horizon (white-hole) part of the extended
 Schwarschild spacetime.
 But that's OK, because we're not interested in that part of the solution
 ...
 at the moment.
 Disatvantage: the constant-time hypersurfaces are null surfaces.
 I fear this will lead to confusion?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Gullstrand–Painlevé coordinates.
 Advantage: the metric is independent of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

time
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Another advantage: constant-time hypersurfaces are flat.
 The global time coordinate is the proper time of a radially free-falling
 observer, starting w/ zero velocity at infinity.
 This seems like a good choice of coordinates, at this stage, in part because
 these preserve some of the intuition we have about space.
 More abstractly, the space-like part of the tangent planes have a simple
 form.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Kruskal–Szekeres coordinates.
 Metric depends on both space and time, but is complete over the extended
 Schwarschild spacetime.
 Contains exponentials, sinh and cosh functions.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Carter–Penrose coordinates.
 AKA 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

conformal coordinates
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 These take the arctan of the Kruskal–Szekeres coordinates, so that the
 Penrose diagram aka conformal diagram can be easily drawn.
 This might be useful for visualization, but might introduce numerical instabili
ties? I dunno.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Generalized approach.
 After a quick skim, it would seem that Francis and Kosowsky
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand cite
key "Francis2004"
literal "false"

\end_inset

 provide the best framework for setting up a numerical simulation.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It currently seems like Gullstrand–Painlevé seems easiest, so lets try that.
 See how it goes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Coordinates and Tangent Spaces
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We'll use Gullstrand–Painlevé coordinates, for the remainder.
 See the Appendix for a general reference.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Notation:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Let 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t,r,\theta,\phi\right)$
\end_inset

 denote a point on the manifold.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Use the subscript 
\begin_inset Formula $o$
\end_inset

 for the observer, and 
\begin_inset Formula $f$
\end_inset

 for a flashlight.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Tangent vectors
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fixing a point 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t,r,\theta,\phi\right)$
\end_inset

 on the manifold, the past null tangent space is given by 
\begin_inset Formula $g=0$
\end_inset

; the timelike tangents are those with 
\begin_inset Formula $g=1$
\end_inset

.
 More precisely, we are looking for vectors 
\begin_inset Formula $\vec{v}$
\end_inset

 such that 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbf{g}\left(\vec{v},\vec{v}\right)=0$
\end_inset

 or 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbf{g}\left(\vec{v},\vec{v}\right)=1$
\end_inset

, where
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\vec{v}=v_{t}\partial_{t}+v_{r}\partial_{r}+v_{\theta}\partial_{\theta}+v_{\phi}\partial_{\phi}
\]

\end_inset

and
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\mathbf{g}=\left(1-\frac{2m}{r}\right)dt\otimes dt-\sqrt{\frac{2m}{r}}\left(dt\otimes dr+dr\otimes dt\right)-dr\otimes dr-r^{2}\left(d\theta\otimes d\theta+\sin^{2}\theta\,d\phi\otimes d\phi\right)
\]

\end_inset

so obviously (duhh)
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\mathbf{g}\left(\vec{v},\vec{v}\right)=\left(1-\frac{2m}{r}\right)v_{t}^{2}-2\sqrt{\frac{2m}{r}}v_{t}v_{r}-v_{r}^{2}-r^{2}\left(v_{\theta}^{2}+\sin^{2}\theta\,v_{\phi}^{2}\right)
\]

\end_inset

Brute-forcing this by hand seems unpleasant, but I don't know of a better
 way just right now.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The first trick is to factor the above using the vielbein frames.
 Write 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\mathbf{g}\left(\vec{v},\vec{v}\right)=w_{0}^{2}-w_{1}^{2}-w_{2}^{2}-w_{3}^{2}
\]

\end_inset

with
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
w_{0} & =v_{t}\\
w_{1} & =v_{r}+v_{t}\sqrt{\frac{2m}{r}}\\
w_{2} & =rv_{\theta}\\
w_{3} & =r\sin\theta\,v_{\phi}
\end{align*}

\end_inset

Sometimes, we'll use the abbreviation 
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
S & \equiv\sqrt{\frac{2m}{r}}
\end{align*}

\end_inset

Note that 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbf{g}\left(\vec{v},\vec{v}\right)=1$
\end_inset

 is a one-sheeted hyperboliod outside of the EH, two-sheeted inside the
 EH.
 We can parametrize the hyperboloid with sinh and cosh, as is convetional.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Lets try some special cases.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Radial tangent vectors
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Radial tangents will have 
\begin_inset Formula $v_{\theta}=v_{\phi}=0$
\end_inset

 and the null tangents solve 
\begin_inset Formula $0=w_{0}^{2}-w_{1}^{2}$
\end_inset

.
 This is given by 
\begin_inset Formula $w_{0}=\pm w_{1}$
\end_inset

.
 Fixing 
\begin_inset Formula $v_{r}$
\end_inset

 gives 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
v_{t}=\pm\left(v_{r}+Sv_{t}\right)
\]

\end_inset

for the radial null tangents.
 The time-like tangents solve 
\begin_inset Formula $1=w_{0}^{2}-w_{1}^{2}$
\end_inset

, which gives 
\begin_inset Formula $w_{0}=\pm\sqrt{1+w_{1}^{2}}$
\end_inset

.
 Plugging through gives 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
v_{t}=\frac{Sv_{r}\pm\sqrt{v_{r}^{2}+1-S^{2}}}{1-S^{2}}
\]

\end_inset

(if I did things correctly.) Quite unenlightening.
 Clearly, the plus-sign is forward time.
 Setting 
\begin_inset Formula $v_{r}=0$
\end_inset

 seems to tell us that the 
\begin_inset Formula $t$
\end_inset

 direction is not the proper time, but must be rescaled by 
\begin_inset Formula $\sqrt{1-2m/r}$
\end_inset

 to get the proper time.
 We're going nowhere fast.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Geodesic Equations
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The simplest approach to the geodesics seems to be the Lagrangian approach;
 which we mimic from the earlier Part Three of this diary.
 The nicest thing about it is that it gives us a constant of motion, for
 free.
 We've also already done the work in one coord system; we just repeat the
 genral logic in another.
 Should be easy, right?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The Lagrangian is
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
L=\frac{1}{2}g_{\mu\nu}\dot{x}^{\mu}\dot{x}^{\nu}
\]

\end_inset

where the shorthand 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\dot{x}^{\mu}=\frac{dx^{\mu}}{d\tau}
\]

\end_inset

is used.
 It's also handy to recall the Legendre transform.
 Defining the conjugate momentum as
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
p_{\mu}=\frac{\partial L}{\partial\dot{x}^{\mu}}
\]

\end_inset

the Hamiltonian is then 
\begin_inset Formula $H=p_{\mu}\dot{x}^{\mu}-L$
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For the Gullstrand–Painlevé chart, it is as always a cut-n-paste job
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
L=\frac{1}{2}\left(\left(1-\frac{2m}{r}\right)\dot{t}^{2}-2\sqrt{\frac{2m}{r}}\dot{t}\dot{r}-\dot{r}^{2}-r^{2}\left(\dot{\theta}^{2}+\sin^{2}\theta\dot{\phi}^{2}\right)\right)
\]

\end_inset

The Euler-Lagrange equations are
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\frac{d}{d\tau}\frac{\partial L}{\partial\dot{x}^{\mu}}-\frac{\partial L}{\partial x^{\mu}}=0
\]

\end_inset

For 
\begin_inset Formula $x^{\mu}=t$
\end_inset

 one obviously has 
\begin_inset Formula $\partial L/\partial t=0$
\end_inset

 and so one has a constant of motion:
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\mbox{const}=\frac{\partial L}{\partial\dot{t}}
\]

\end_inset

Call this the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

energy
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Working this out explicitly, 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\mbox{const}=\frac{E}{m}=\frac{\partial L}{\partial\dot{t}}=\left(1-\frac{2m}{r}\right)\dot{t}-\sqrt{\frac{2m}{r}}\dot{r}
\]

\end_inset

This is written so that the constant is dimensionless, and the energy 
\begin_inset Formula $E$
\end_inset

 has the same units as the mass.
 For null geodesics, one has a conformal time; just use 
\begin_inset Formula $E$
\end_inset

 and ignore the 
\begin_inset Formula $m$
\end_inset

.
 The above can be rwritten in the beguiling form 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
Sw_{1}=\dot{t}-\frac{E}{m}
\]

\end_inset

This allows a remarkable (and confusing) calculation (did I make a mistake??)
 Since the RHS is independent of 
\begin_inset Formula $r$
\end_inset

, the partial vanishes:
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
0=S\frac{\partial w_{1}}{\partial r}+w_{1}\frac{\partial S}{\partial r}
\]

\end_inset

Then, plugging in
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
\frac{\partial S}{\partial r} & =-\frac{S}{2r}
\end{align*}

\end_inset

results in
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\frac{\partial w_{1}}{\partial r}=\frac{w_{1}}{2r}
\]

\end_inset

which is wacky and wild, since explicit differention gives
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\frac{\partial w_{1}}{\partial r}=\dot{t}\frac{\partial S}{\partial r}=-\frac{\dot{t}S}{2r}
\]

\end_inset

Equating these two gives 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
0=\dot{r}+2S\dot{t}
\]

\end_inset

which is surprising.
 We have to be careful: this would only hold on surfaces of constant energy?!
 Unexpected but plausible, I guess.
 I'm confused and suspicious.
 Something seems wrong, but I can't see the mistake.
 Plugging this around gives 
\begin_inset Formula $w_{1}=-S\dot{t}$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\dot{w_{1}}=-S\ddot{t}-\dot{t}\dot{S}=-S\ddot{t}+S\dot{t}\dot{r}/2r$
\end_inset

 and so Hmmm.
 I'm floundering, I'm missing something, here.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Radial eqns
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For 
\begin_inset Formula $x^{\mu}=r$
\end_inset

, the radial equation is brute-forced:
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\frac{\partial L}{\partial r}=\frac{m}{r^{2}}\dot{t}^{2}+\frac{1}{2r}S\dot{t}\dot{r}-r\left(\dot{\theta}^{2}+\sin^{2}\theta\dot{\phi}^{2}\right)
\]

\end_inset

Plugging in the energy simplifies this slightly, to
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\frac{\partial L}{\partial r}=\frac{\dot{t}}{2r}\left(1-\frac{E}{m}\right)-r\left(\dot{\theta}^{2}+\sin^{2}\theta\dot{\phi}^{2}\right)
\]

\end_inset

And I guess other forms are possible ...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The momentum is
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
p_{r}=\frac{\partial L}{\partial\dot{r}}=-\left(\dot{r}+S\dot{t}\right)=-w_{1}
\]

\end_inset

Brute force gives
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
\frac{d}{d\tau}\frac{\partial L}{\partial\dot{r}}= & -S\ddot{t}-\dot{t}\frac{dS}{d\tau}-\ddot{r}\\
= & -S\ddot{t}+\dot{t}\dot{r}\frac{S}{2r}-\ddot{r}
\end{align*}

\end_inset

but we can also differentiate the energy condition to get 
\begin_inset Formula $\ddot{t}=\dot{S}w_{1}+S\dot{w_{1}}$
\end_inset

 and use 
\begin_inset Formula $\dot{S}=-S\dot{r}/2r$
\end_inset

 to get
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\dot{w_{1}}=\frac{\ddot{t}}{S}+\frac{\dot{r}}{2r}w_{1}
\]

\end_inset

which is clearly simpler.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Combining these simpler forms gives
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
0=\frac{d}{d\tau}\frac{\partial L}{\partial\dot{r}}-\frac{\partial L}{\partial r}=-\frac{\ddot{t}}{S}-\frac{\dot{r}}{2r}w_{1}-\frac{\dot{t}}{2r}\left(1-\frac{E}{m}\right)+r\left(\dot{\theta}^{2}+\sin^{2}\theta\dot{\phi}^{2}\right)
\]

\end_inset

We can certainly try to integrate this numerically, but no easy by-hand
 work seems to pop up.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Perhaps we should work with 
\begin_inset Formula $w_{1}$
\end_inset

 directly, so that
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
0=-\dot{w_{1}}-\frac{\dot{t}}{2r}\left(1-\frac{E}{m}\right)+r\left(\dot{\theta}^{2}+\sin^{2}\theta\dot{\phi}^{2}\right)
\]

\end_inset

which looks simpler.
 Then using one of the crazy identities above, of 
\begin_inset Formula $w_{1}=-S\dot{t}$
\end_inset

 gives 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
0=-\dot{w_{1}}+\frac{w_{1}}{2rS}\left(1-\frac{E}{m}\right)+r\left(\dot{\theta}^{2}+\sin^{2}\theta\dot{\phi}^{2}\right)
\]

\end_inset

which is a first-order eqn.
 This looks tractable.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Anyway, we should double-check this to make sure we did not miss some easier,
 less messy derivation of all this, and that it agrees with published results
 from other sources.
 I don't think I made an error are famous last words.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Angular eqns
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Although it's tedious, we should do the same for the angular coords.
 Below, we brute-force it; but we should really employ the angular momentum
 as a constant of motion.
 So, for example,
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\frac{\partial L}{\partial\phi}=0
\]

\end_inset

and thus we deduce 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\frac{\partial L}{\partial\dot{\phi}}=-2r\sin^{2}\theta\,\dot{\phi}=-2J=\mbox{const}
\]

\end_inset

with 
\begin_inset Formula $J$
\end_inset

 the angular momentum.
 Differentiating explcitly, we get, up to a constant
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
0=\dot{J}=\sin^{2}\theta\left(\ddot{\phi}\,r+\dot{r}\dot{\phi}+2\dot{\phi}\dot{\theta}r\frac{\cos\theta}{\sin\theta}\right)
\]

\end_inset

The other coordinate gives
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
\frac{\partial L}{\partial\theta}= & -2r\sin\theta\cos\theta\,\dot{\phi^{2}}\\
= & -\frac{2\cos\theta}{r\sin\theta}J^{2}\\
\frac{\partial L}{\partial\dot{\theta}}= & -2r\dot{\theta}
\end{align*}

\end_inset

and so 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
0=\frac{d}{d\tau}\frac{\partial L}{\partial\dot{\theta}}-\frac{\partial L}{\partial\theta}=r^{2}\ddot{\theta}+r\dot{r}\dot{\theta}-\frac{\cos\theta}{\sin\theta}J^{2}
\]

\end_inset

and Bleh.
 The correct approach is probably to just transform to cordinates in which
 
\begin_inset Formula $\theta=\pi/2$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\dot{\theta}=0$
\end_inset

, solve for constant angular momentum, which becomes 
\begin_inset Formula $J=r\dot{\phi}$
\end_inset

 and then rotate back to wherever we needed to be.
 Yuck.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Coding this up into a solver won't be fun.
 Are there any open-source packages that do this, already? Surely there
 must be!
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Resources
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Everything on github:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The github Schwarzschild topic: 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
name "Github Schwarzschild topic"
target "https://github.com/topics/schwarzschild"
literal "false"

\end_inset

 Amazingly, none of the existing projects look useful.
 It's a black hole, out there.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The github geodesics-equation topic: 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
name "Github Geodesics-equation topic"
target "https://github.com/topics/geodesics-equation"
literal "false"

\end_inset

.
 No winners here, either.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
name "Einstein.py"
target "https://github.com/einsteinpy/einsteinpy-geodesics"
literal "false"

\end_inset

 geodesic solver.
 Seems to be nice; uses existing Julia diffeq solvers.
 The Julia appears to integrate Hamiltonians.
 I guess that's one easy way to do it...
 will it work across the event horizon?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Conclusion: Strikeout! No one is even coming close to doing what I want
 to do.
 Well, that's interesting.
 And unexpected.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What people seem to be doing:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
One of the solvers (mentioned above) just brute-forces solutions to Hamiltonian
 systems.
 This is nice, but it is not clear that these make use of the angular momentum
 as a constant of motion.
 Also, we still need to parameterize the assorted tangent vectors.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Another solver (running on CUDA) just brute-forces the metric.
 You give it the metric, you say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

use runge-kutta
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, and go.
 Simple, but does not make use of any constants of motion to help with stability.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Conclusions: I'll have to go it alone.
 Unclear if I should code in python (so any damn fool can plink on the code)
 or in C++ (since the solver will be slow, and I'll want to control performance
 and parallelization.) Sigh.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
The End
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
End-of-file marker.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset CommandInset bibtex
LatexCommand bibtex
btprint "btPrintCited"
bibfiles "/home/linas/src/fractal/paper/gr"
options "tufte"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
