#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\usepackage{slashed}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "cmtt" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
General Relativity Diary Overview
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

Table of Contents
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

Preface
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepstas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
11 Nov 2023
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
This is directory contais a sequence of diary entries concerning General
 Relativity, and my naive attempts to understand it, and it's relationship
 to quantum field theory.
 There are enough dirary entires and appendices that things are getting
 a bit disorganized, and a table of contents is needed.
 This document provides a combined preface, table of contents and apologia.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The original goal of this project was (and still is) to understand the interplay
 of quantum mechanics and general relativity.
 As a general apologia: it combines various abstract concepts utterly lacking
 in rigor, and thus likely wrong or even insane, to very concrete, textbook-leve
l reviews that say little more than textbooks, other than to give a slight
 spin on the proceedings.
 The textbook-concrete material is organized into 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

appendixes
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, providing notation, formulas, and sometimes derivations of simple results.
 Longer derivations, and general ruminations, philosophical remarks, etc.
 appear in the chapters.
 The contents here are not meant to be 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

published
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 in any traditional sense, although perhaps certain subsets could maybe
 be cleaned up.
 Part of the goal of this intro is to provide enough of an overview to allow
 the non-crazy subsets to be identified, and coherent threads to be abstrcted
 from them.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So here we go:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Chapter
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

One Initial remarks.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Chapter
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

Two Attempt to talk about spinors and entropy.
 Short.
 Nothing actually happens here.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Chapter
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

Three Intro to the smart dust concept.
 Burble about Huygens sums.
 Basic calculations in Schwarschild coordinate frame.
 Geodesics via Christoffel symbols.
 Geodesics via Lagrangian approach.
 Timelike radial and null radial geodesics.
 All of the formulas here replicate basic generic texbook/classroom lecture
 formulas.
 The smart-dust concept is the only interesting thing going on in this chapter.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Chapter
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

Four Spin holonomy.
 Empty.
 Nothing happened.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Chapter
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

Five Smart dust, in earnest.
 A recap of desired smart-dust properties, in condensed form.
 Review of possible different metrics.
 Selection of Gullstrand–Painlevé coordinates as the best/easiest for the
 task at hand.
 Geodesic eqns in (spherical) Gullstrand–Painlevé coordinates, using the
 most naive/straight-ahead approach possible.
 Gets lost in a tangle of ugliness, due to the sphere coordinate system.
 Abandoned, cause it got too messy & daunting.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Chapter
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

Six Stuff
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
