#LyX 2.4 created this file. For more info see https://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 620
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children no
\language american
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding auto
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_roman_osf false
\font_sans_osf false
\font_typewriter_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\float_placement class
\float_alignment class
\paperfontsize default
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\use_formatted_ref 0
\use_minted 0
\use_lineno 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tablestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\change_bars false
\postpone_fragile_content true
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\docbook_table_output 0
\docbook_mathml_prefix 1
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Multiplication Theorem (Scratchpad)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepstas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
April 2026
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
A short revisit of the Bernoulli Operator diary,
 focusing on the multiplication theorem.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is a scratchpad,
 i.e.
 I'm going to write some relatively trivial algebraic manipulations here,
 instead of on a piece of paper.
 Mostly because this is editable in the way that paper is not.
 I expect zero deep results.
 I do expect to answer some questions I've posed for myself.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
The Multiplication Theorem
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Write the Bernoulli operator as
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\left[\mathcal{L}_{k}g\right]\left(x\right)=\sum_{m=0}^{k-1}g\left(\frac{x+m}{k}\right)
\]

\end_inset

Write a discrete Fourier series for 
\begin_inset Formula $g$
\end_inset

 as 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
g\left(x\right)=\sum_{n=0}^{\infty}f\left(n\right)\exp\left(2\pi inx\right)
\]

\end_inset

Note this is not the sum runs only over the non–negative 
\begin_inset Formula $n$
\end_inset

 and so this is NOT the Hilbert space 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{2}\left(\mathbb{R}\right)$
\end_inset

.
 Plugging through
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
\left[\mathcal{L}_{k}g\right]\left(x\right) & =\sum_{n=0}^{\infty}f\left(n\right)\sum_{m=0}^{k-1}\exp\left(2\pi in\frac{x+m}{k}\right)\\
 & =\sum_{n=0}^{\infty}f\left(n\right)\exp\left(\frac{2\pi inx}{k}\right)\sum_{m=0}^{k-1}\exp\left(\frac{2\pi inm}{k}\right)\\
 & =\sum_{n=0}^{\infty}f\left(n\right)\exp\left(\frac{2\pi inx}{k}\right)\begin{cases}
k & \mbox{for integer }p=n/k\\
0 & \mbox{otherwise}
\end{cases}\\
 & =k\sum_{p=0}^{\infty}f\left(kp\right)\exp\left(2\pi ipx\right)
\end{align*}

\end_inset

Then,
 if 
\begin_inset Formula $f$
\end_inset

 is completely multiplicative,
 i.e.
 
\begin_inset Formula $f\left(kp\right)=f\left(k\right)f\left(p\right)$
\end_inset

 then we arrive at the classical multiplication theorem
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\sum_{m=0}^{k-1}g\left(\frac{x+m}{k}\right)=kf\left(k\right)g\left(x\right)
\]

\end_inset

The question in my mind is how this generalizes.
 There are two directions to go in.
 One is to replace 
\begin_inset Formula $\sum_{m}\exp$
\end_inset

 by some multiplicative character,
 in general.
 Another is to replace it by something else that already obeys the multiplication theorem.
 Lets try the second one first.
 Write 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
g\left(x\right)=\sum_{n=0}^{\infty}f\left(n\right)h\left(nx\right)
\]

\end_inset

Then replicating the previous gives
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
\left[\mathcal{L}_{k}g\right]\left(x\right) & =\sum_{n=0}^{\infty}f\left(n\right)\sum_{m=0}^{k-1}h\left(\frac{nx}{k}+\frac{nm}{k}\right)
\end{align*}

\end_inset

There's only one function that obeys 
\begin_inset Formula $h\left(x+y\right)=h\left(x\right)h\left(y\right)$
\end_inset

 and that is the exponential.
 This holds even if we relax the domain of 
\begin_inset Formula $x$
\end_inset

 to be 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

anything
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 (any space or manifold).
 This has the form of a group homomorphism;
 the plus sign implies its some abelian group.
 But then we'd have to have 
\begin_inset Formula $f$
\end_inset

 be group valued as well.
 Down this path lies generic group and ring theory,
 and that's a potentially bottomless pit which does not seem to promise interesting results.
 One possible exception might be to replace the Fourier xform by the Gelfand representation on C*-algebras,
 but this again wanders into territory that is quite different,
 and has it's own distinct set of rules.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
at least if 
\begin_inset Formula $h$
\end_inset

 is continuous.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Suppose that 
\begin_inset Formula $h\left(x+a\right)=h\left(x\right)r\left(a\right)$
\end_inset

 
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
