#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Free Will
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepstas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
4 April 2023
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Ah hah! I solved it! The problem of free will! Or rather, I have found a
 solution that I am happy with.
 Your milage may vary.
 The answer is rather mathematical, and if you do not have a formal education
 in mathematics and physics, and if you do not have long hands-on working
 exprience with dynamical systems, you won't much like it.
 The answer is perhaps 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

obvious
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 if you do have such qualifications: it is the collection of critical points
 in dynamical systems.
 Duhh.
 Of course, what else could it have been? Nonetheless, I am excited because
 (at least for me) it offers the first practical guidepost for thinking
 about freewill in complex dynamical systems, including my current favorites:
 ecological, sociological, political, moral, biochemical, neurophysical
 and economic and geopolitical systems.
 OK, look, yeah, mathematics does not extend to these domains, but I do
 offer an explantation that is not quantum-mechanical mumbo-jumbo or that
 free will is due to the machine elves one sees during DMT trips.
 My explanation will sound like ...
 mathematical mumbo jumbo if ...
 you don't have formal training.
 But I'll try.
 The intro/apologia should be enough for most readers.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Apologia (Introduction)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Formal papers conventionally start with an introduction, but, as you are
 already aware, this is not a formal paper.
 Frankly, I love reading formal stuff, but writing it, not so much.
 Sorry.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is an apologia because I do not have a formal education in philosophy.
 I have not even read the corresponding article in the Stanford Encyclopedia
 of Philosophy.
 If this offends you, stop reading.
 I might read this entry later.
 But frankly, life is short, there's much to do, and creating a chef-d'overe
 on Free Will is not big on my priority list.
 You can also stop reading here, too.
 You have a choice.
 you can exercise it.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The discussion will soon turn mathematical, since my primary target audience
 is the physicist who somehow beleives that the laws of physics, deterministic
 as they are, somehow (magically) imply that free will is an illusion.
 Not a few physicists wrestle with this problem.
 I know I have, and for more than a few decades.
 I'm thrilled to have a handle on it, at last.
 And I already told you the answer: it is the set of ciritical points in
 dynamical systems.
 (Of course! What else could it have been?) The rest of this introduction
 will attempt to sketch this out in greater detail, in layman's terms.
 The goal is to develop the gut-sense intuition first, before getting mathematic
al.
 Although ...
 even some basic math seems unavoidable.
 I will not be writing for grade-school students.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let me start with a paraphrase of a sketch of Free Will that Douglas Adams
 provides towards the end of his (second?) book on the Hitch-hikers Guide
 to the Galaxy.
 Spoiler alert: not only is the Earth destroyed, but all timelines of all
 universes containing Earth are destroyed.
 See, Earth does not belong to those slices that are invariant in the multiverse.
 To exist, you must be in all variants of the multiverse, not just some
 of them.
 The number of choices shrank, until they shrank to zero.
 What does this mean in non-imaginative, non-fictional terms? I sat at my
 uncle's death-bed, and watched him die.
 You know what happened? He lost the ability to go outside and play soccer.
 To go outside and ride a bike.
 To go outside.
 The size of his universe, the possibilities open to him, shrank and shrank,
 until there literally weren't any left at all.
 He was literally dead, and for him, the realm of possibilities shrank to
 literally zero.
 Not metaphorically, but literally.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The equation being made here is that life is equivalent to a large variety
 of choices.
 The more choices, the better.
 If you are young and fit and healthy, you have a vast menu of things to
 choose from, of things you could do.
 And this is, framed in terms of the common-sense notion of free-will: one
 can chose to take a walk in the park, one can choose to pet a cat (if she
 lets), one can choose to skip lunch, although eventually hunger will compels
 eating.
 One does not have utter free will with respect to food, but one does have
 some flexibility with regards to when to eat.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
An example of 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
boundary of mandelbrot set
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
