#LyX 2.2 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 508
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass amsart
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\end_preamble
\use_default_options false
\begin_modules
theorems-ams
eqs-within-sections
figs-within-sections
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "courier" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Graphical Sheaves
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepstas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
27 October 2017
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
An examination of a certain method for extracting structure from graphs,
 in a fashion resembling sheaves.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Intro
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Its this we explore
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Begin with the standard definition of a graph.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Definition*
A graph 
\begin_inset Formula $G=\left(V,E\right)$
\end_inset

 is an ordered pair 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(V,E\right)$
\end_inset

 of two sets, the first being the set 
\begin_inset Formula $V$
\end_inset

 of vertices, and the second being the set 
\begin_inset Formula $E$
\end_inset

 of edges.
 An edge 
\begin_inset Formula $e\in E$
\end_inset

 is a pair 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(v_{1},v_{2}\right)$
\end_inset

 of vertices.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Definition*
For directed graphs, the vertex ordering in the edge matters.
 For undirected graphs, it does not.
 The subsequent will assume both directed and undirected edges, as the occasion
 and the need fits.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Definition*

\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
