#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\usepackage{slashed}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "cmtt" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Complexity
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

Combinatorial Syntactical Constraints
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

Syntactical Kinematics
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepstas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
11 January 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Diary exploring how complexity is expressed, using tools from combinatorics
 and model theory.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Approximately 100 to 140 years ago, Boltzmann, Planck, Bose, Einstein, Dirac
 and Fermi considered the distributions to which their names are now attached.
 They considered collections of a large number of identical particles (photons,
 bosons, fermions) and how such collections behaved, thermodynamically.
 This lead to a microscopic description of the equation of state for a gas
 in a box, of a formula for black-body radiation, and foundations for some
 of the more exotic structures in nature.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Since then, there have been broad advances in dynamical systems and ergodic
 theory.
 There have also been advances in linguistics, computers, model theory,
 proof theory and, of course deep-learing neural-net large language models
 (LLM's) embedded in hyperdimensional vector spaces.
 Despite this, I have been unable to find, read about or personally formulate
 a general conception of how entropy and thermodynamics works in high-dimensiona
l spaces.
 Examples are abundant: What's the entropy of protein folding? What's the
 entropy of galaxy formation? What's the entropy of an immunoglobulin antibody
 binding site? A DNA coding region? What's the entropy of the English language?
 What's the entropy of the spread of Human culture, language and genetics
 through Europe and Asia? All these are describable via complex, dynamic
 structured graphs and relationships interacting in non-linear ways.
 They are all big enough and complex enough that we should be able to find
 some sort of generic meso-scale statistical-mechanical theory for them.
 Drunk people at parties say things like 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

oh, is a lot like the Ising Model
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and everyone shakes their heads in agreement, but it never gets farther
 than that.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This diary entry will start very very small.
 The above grandiose and almost bombastic introduction is meant to serve
 as a reminder to myself as to why I should invest my time and energy into
 this.
 I tend to get distracted easily, and leave projects unfinished.
 The above captures the inspiration for why, perhaps, this diary is needed.
 Again, what follows will be miniscule, compared to the over-arching sketch
 above.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Here's how to start.
 Consider first Moreau's Necklace-counting function.
 This is a combinatoric function, counting how many distinct necklaces can
 be made from colored beads.
 The beads can be freely arranged; the length and the number of colors are
 fixed.
 What's the entropy? For two colors and one dimension, this is just the
 Ising model, with zero interaction.
 What if we imagine the beads to be words, selected from a vocabulary of
 size N, but require that the constructed necklaces be grammatically correct
 sentences? That is, we apply syntactic constraints to limit acceptable
 sentences.
 To make it more physics-like, we should say that grammatically unacceptable
 sentences are high-energy, while grammatical ones are low-energy.
 We can assign to each rule of grammar, each grammatical dependency, a cost,
 an interaction-energy, so that an analogy can be made to ferromagnetic
 and antiferromagnetic behaviors in Ising models.
 This diary is an effort to mash up and push on this collection of ideas.
 I fear it won't get far.
 Every journey starts with a single step, but some of us walk faster and
 more gracefully than others.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
The End
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
