#LyX 1.6.2 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 345
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\use_default_options false
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\font_roman times
\font_sans helvet
\font_typewriter courier
\font_default_family default
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 2
\use_esint 0
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\author "" 
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
GKW Lattice
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepstas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
February 2010
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
The Minkowski Question Mark function is a highly singular function that
 has, among other properties, is able to completely alter the spectrum of
 an operator when it is used as a similarity transform.
 The goal of this paper is to formulate the tools to understand how this
 is possible.
 Specifically, it requires passing from operators defined on the Hardy space
 of functions defined on the real unit interval, to a space of functions
 defined on the Cantor set.
 This paper explores this formulation for the Gauss-Kuzmin-Wirsing (GKW)
 operator, which is the transfer operator (Ruelle operator) for the shift
 operator on continued fractions.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
This is a diary of partial results.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The observation that motivates this paper is that while the GKW operator
 has one spectrum in its ordinary formulation, a similarity transform based
 on the Minkowski Question Mark function mutates it into a different operator
 with a different spectrum entirely.
 The goal of this paper is to understand how this happens, and to provide
 the machinery for dealing with it.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The next observation is that the machinery of operators defined on Banach
 spaces over functions on the real-valued unit interval (Hardy spaces) is
 insufficient for the task.
 This is because the the singular nature of the Minkwoski Question Mark.
 However, the Question Mark does seem to have a natural representation on
 the Cantor set.
 Thus, the basic chore here is to examine both the GKW operator, and related
 operators, acting on the set of functions defined on the Cantor set, and
 clarifying how this space is related to the usual Hardy space setting.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To be concrete, the motivation stems from the following.
 Consider the Gauss Map, which is defined as the function 
\begin_inset Formula $h(x)=\frac{1}{x}-\left\lfloor \frac{1}{x}\right\rfloor $
\end_inset

 acting on the unit interval.
 It drew Gauss's attention because it is the shift operator in the space
 of continued fractions: if one writes out the continued-fraction expansion
 for 
\begin_inset Formula $x\in[0,1]$
\end_inset

 as 
\begin_inset Formula \[
x=\frac{1}{a_{1}+\frac{1}{a_{2}+\frac{1}{a_{3}+\cdots}}}\equiv\left[a_{1},a_{2},a_{3},\cdots\right]\]

\end_inset

then one has that 
\begin_inset Formula \[
h(x)=\left[a_{2},a_{3},\cdots\right]\]

\end_inset

whence the name 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

shift operator
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 One may then consider the transfer operator formed from the Gauss Map;
 this is called the Gauss-Kuzmin-Wirsing or GKW operator, and is given by
 
\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation}
\left[\mathcal{L}_{h}f\right](x)=\sum_{n=1}^{\infty}\frac{1}{(n+x)^{2}}f\left(\frac{1}{n+x}\right)\label{eq:sum-form}\end{equation}

\end_inset

where 
\begin_inset Formula $f$
\end_inset

 is just an ordinary function on the unit interval: 
\begin_inset Formula $f:\left[0,1\right]\to\mathbb{R}$
\end_inset

.
 This operator has not been solved in closed form, although Gauss did provide
 the eigenvector for the largest eigenvalue (which is 1).
 The next eigenvalue is known as the GKW constant, and is roughly 
\begin_inset Formula $\lambda=0.30366300\cdots$
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Consider now a closely-related function, the Gauss Map transformed by a
 similarity transformation, with the Minkowski Question Mark providing the
 similarity transformation: 
\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation}
c(x)=?\left(\frac{1}{?^{-1}(x)}-\left\lfloor \frac{1}{?^{-1}(x)}\right\rfloor \right)=(?\circ h\circ?^{-1})(x)\label{eq:}\end{equation}

\end_inset

This map is very simple: it consists of straight-line segments between values
 of 
\begin_inset Formula $1/2^{k}$
\end_inset

, and can be written as 
\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation}
c(x)=2-2^{n}x\;\textrm{ for \; }\frac{1}{2^{n}}<x\leq\frac{1}{2^{n-1}}\label{eq:}\end{equation}

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
