#LyX 1.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 221
\textclass article
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme pslatex
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 1
\use_natbib 0
\use_numerical_citations 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Quotation


\series bold 
From: Linas Vepstas <linas@linas.org>
\layout Quotation


\series bold 
To: Philippe Flajolet <Philippe.Flajolet@inria.fr>
\layout Quotation


\series bold 
Subject: Differences of Zeta values
\layout Quotation


\series bold 
Date: 15 January 2006
\newline 

\layout Standard

Salut Philippe,
\layout Standard

I had a chance to read through your letter a bit more carefully; I was rather
 thrilled to receive it.
 As to your offer of a joint publication of results; yes, I would very much
 like to take you up on that offer.
 
\layout Standard

My apologies for taking so long to respond; I was hoping that after reading
 it an digesting it, I might have something brilliant to add; but unfortunately,
 I do not.
 I was able to check some of your formulas, but not all; I haven't had much
 time, and I do not have an algebra system such as Maple.
 The final estimate that you arrive at is in excellent with the data.
 I'm attaching a file with the first 600 values of the sequence for you
 to play with as you wish.
 I beleive the values should all be correct (I fixed some accuracy problems
 a while ago, but hadn't triple-checked.).
 When I saw your final estimate for the sequence, I slapped my head; its
 funny how numeric estimates to data can be so misleading, and I felt a
 twinge of embarassment over the convoluted nature of my best fit.
\layout Standard

I'm rediscovering your paper 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

Fine structure constants
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

; its making more of an impact now than when I first read it.
 In the intervening time, I've learned a lot about the various connections
 between ergodic theory, modular forms, Rieman surfaces, Fuchsian groups,
 and the like; its been a very intersting tour.
 I haven't been able to apply much of this to actually solving any of the
 problems I've been looking at, but I feel I'm certainly barking up an interesti
ng tree.
\layout Standard

A couple of questions, and a couple of remarks, then: 
\newline 

\layout Paragraph

Nordlund-Rice:
\layout Standard

This integral quite amazed me; I hadn't seen it before, but I like it.
 Can you perhaps recommend a book or review on finite differences? After
 poking around the last few years, I get the impression that the general
 topic of finite differences is not quite as simple as one might naively
 suppose.
 I'm not sure quite what I'm looking for, but was wondering is something
 lept to mind.
\newline 

\layout Paragraph

Series identities: 
\layout Standard

Here's a shallow question.
 There seems to be a set of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

well-known
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 exactly summable series of the form 
\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation}
\sum_{n=0}^{\infty}{n+a \choose b}\zeta(n+a)\label{eq:}\end{equation}

\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation}
\sum_{n=0}^{\infty}(-1)^{n}{n+a \choose b}\zeta(n+a)\label{eq:}\end{equation}

\end_inset 

 with 
\begin_inset Formula $a$
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $b$
\end_inset 

 some numbers or integers; for example: 
\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation}
\sum_{n=0}^{\infty}{n+s+1 \choose n+1}\,\left(\zeta(n+s+2)-1\right)=1\label{eq:}\end{equation}

\end_inset 

 One may easily derive identities for different 
\begin_inset Formula $a$
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $b$
\end_inset 

 by applying some simple trick or another, and even obtain some recurrence
 relations.
 However, when I do so, my approach, and results, are rather ad hoc.
 Is a general statement of all of these identities? Do they bear someone's
 name? Is there some accepted notation and normalization for the various
 recursion relations that bind them together? I can't say its deep; but
 it could be handy to have these tabulated.
 
\newline 

\layout Paragraph

A slight generalization:
\layout Standard

I can generalize my formulas 35-37 ever so slightly: It seems I can write
 these as
\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation}
\zeta(s)=\frac{s}{s-1}-sw^{s-1}\sum_{n=0}^{\infty}(-1)^{n}{s-1 \choose n}\, u_{n}\label{eq:zeta}\end{equation}

\end_inset 

 where the 
\begin_inset Formula $u_{m}$
\end_inset 

 are polynomials in 
\begin_inset Formula $w$
\end_inset 

: 
\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation}
u_{n}(w)=1-\gamma+\sum_{k=1}^{n}(-w)^{k}{n \choose k}\,\left(\frac{1}{k}-\frac{\zeta(k+1)}{k+1}\right)\label{eq:un}\end{equation}

\end_inset 

 What we've discussed so far is the case of 
\begin_inset Formula $w=1$
\end_inset 

.
 The leading asymptotic behaviour is 
\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation}
u_{n}(w)=\frac{1}{2w(n+1)}+\mathcal{O}\left(\exp-c\sqrt{n+1}\right)\label{eq:}\end{equation}

\end_inset 

 Now here's the interesting part: the constant 
\begin_inset Formula $c$
\end_inset 

 depends on 
\begin_inset Formula $w$
\end_inset 

 and seems to get larger as 
\begin_inset Formula $w$
\end_inset 

 gets larger.
 How, I can't quite tell; possibly 
\begin_inset Formula $c\sim\sqrt{w}$
\end_inset 

.
 The frequency of the oscillatory part drops with larger 
\begin_inset Formula $w$
\end_inset 

 also.
 I've done some numeric exploration up to about 
\begin_inset Formula $w\approx2$
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $n<600$
\end_inset 

 although as you are well aware the terms in these sums are painfully large.
 I'm not sure what to make of this, but thought you'd find this interesting.
\newline 

\layout Paragraph

A different generalization:
\layout Standard

There's a different generalization, where equation (
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{eq:un}

\end_inset 

) is expressed in terms for the Hurwitz zeta 
\begin_inset Formula $\zeta(s,q)$
\end_inset 

, for arbitrary value of 
\begin_inset Formula $q$
\end_inset 

.
 I haven't quite written these out yet, they're a little more complex.
 I expect an overall similar development.
 Again, I thought you'd be interested, as now one has relations on L-function.
\newline 

\newline 
I am not sure what to add; its been a while since I looked at this problem.
 I hope to hear from you soon,
\newline 

\newline 

\layout Standard

Sincerely, 
\layout Standard

Linas Vepstas
\the_end
