#LyX 2.0 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 413
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\end_preamble
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman times
\font_sans helvet
\font_typewriter courier
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 2
\use_esint 0
\use_mhchem 0
\use_mathdots 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\use_refstyle 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
The Cantor Set
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepstas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
3 December 2013
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
This paper is an outline review of assorted factoids I've learned about
 the Cantor Set, and a large variety of related topics.
 Mostly, this is about the infinite binary tree, the structures that can
 be built on it, the measure theory of it, the operators on it, and their
 spectrum.
 The goal here is to help me organize my thoughts.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Overview
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So, a bulleted list:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The bernoulli transform destroys classical information.
 Averaging the two sides together destroys the ability to find out what
 was on either side; this is why its a model of dissipation: it increases
 entropy in this sense.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Open problem: write down an expression that shows how it increases entropy.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
This information-erasure aspect is one reason why the transfer operator
 and the koopman operator don't obey canonical commutation relations.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
There are no operators that could ever obey the the canonical commutation
 relations (need formal proof) Informally, its because the ladder operators
 describe a 1-D model: creation and anhilation operators increment and decrement
 an integer.
 In a misleadingly similar way, the transfer operator can be understood
 as a left-shift on a one-sided one-dimensional lattice.
 However, the right-shift requires 'making up' a value of the lattice position
 introduced on the right: it can be a zero, a one, or indeterminate.
 This is a forced branching.
 The 1D lattice model describes a binary tree, not a 1-D ladder.
 Although the transfer and Koopman opers act on the 1-D lattice, and thus
 seem to be creation/annihilation-like, its just not the same: the lattice
 positions have values on them, the CCR does not.
 Hmm.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The suggestive relations to the Riemann zeta are all tied to the CCR algebra,
 which is 'reversible'.
 So, for example.
 we have an eigenvalue relation: 
\begin_inset Formula $z\frac{\partial}{\partial z}z^{\alpha}=\alpha z^{\alpha}$
\end_inset

 and we have the CCR 
\begin_inset Formula $[\frac{\partial}{\partial z},z]=1$
\end_inset

 and if we interpret z and partial as create, and annihil, then only the
 usual follows (as this is the Stone-vonNeumann theoerem), we have position
 and momentum opers, and the number oper is exactly the spring hamiltonian
 minus 1/2.
 No suprises.
 Only new thing is that the eigenstates of position and moment opers are
 gaussians offset from the origin (i.e.
 are entire), and these two operators have continuous complex-valued spectrum.
 This is the Segal-Bargmann space.
 (Appendix should show the eigenstates and the spectrum)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The other curious side-effect of above is that 
\begin_inset Formula $z\frac{\partial}{\partial z}=\frac{\partial}{\partial\ln z}$
\end_inset

 and so eigenstates of the LHS are eigenstates of RHS...
 which gives the very traditional fourier thingy...
 viz 
\begin_inset Formula $\frac{\partial}{\partial\ln z}e^{\alpha\ln z}=\alpha e^{\alpha\ln z}$
\end_inset

 How odd...
 so we have the usual duality between 
\begin_inset Formula $[p,x]$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $[a,a^{*}]$
\end_inset

 but using the log seems to rotate this duality sideways again.
 Anyway, exp is dual to derivative in general (e.g.
 tangent-space to manifold; lie-lagebra to lie-group; Poincare duality).
 I don't understand the generic analog of this change-of-variable to log...
 This is a big TODO to flesh this out.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Hmm.
 ..
 Reversible (in the above paragraphs) == non-information-destroying, e.g.
 non-qubit-destroying ...
 what does this really mean? Usually means unitary...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
What is the Segal-Bargman xform of the Riemannn zeta?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
In previous work, there was a shift state of zeta...
 what was it, again?
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\zeta(s)=\sum_{n=1}^{\infty}n^{-s}
\]

\end_inset

 which ...
 uhh, no
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
What about the primon gas model?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
What is the tangent space for the eigenfuncs for the bernoulli xform? In
 particular, what form does it take on the unit circle (i.e.
 the generators?) This is interesting because the unit x-form describes
 unitary evolution, non-decaying.
 So we have
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\mathcal{L}_{p}\beta(x;s)=\frac{1}{p^{s}}\beta(x;s)
\]

\end_inset

 and so we want 
\begin_inset Formula $p^{-s}=e^{i\phi}$
\end_inset

 for real-valued 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

.
 Solveing, we get 
\begin_inset Formula $s=-i\phi/\ln p$
\end_inset

.
 The 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Review http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coherent_states_in_mathematical_physics
 in the context of open Bernoulli questions...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
What is action of Squeeze operator, Displacement operator on these shifts?
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
