#LyX 2.0 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 413
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\end_preamble
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman times
\font_sans helvet
\font_typewriter courier
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 2
\use_esint 0
\use_mhchem 0
\use_mathdots 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\use_refstyle 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Algebraic Series
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepstas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
Initial draft: 6 October 2016
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Lie algebras can be mapped to Lie groups by means of the exp map.
 But what happens if the exp map is replaced by some arbitrary series? That
 is the questin being asked here.
 That is, given an element 
\begin_inset Formula $x\in\mathfrak{a}$
\end_inset

 the exp map defines a group element 
\begin_inset Formula $g\in\mathfrak{A}$
\end_inset

 by 
\begin_inset Formula $g=\sum_{n=0}^{\infty}x^{n}/n!$
\end_inset

 The question posed here is that, given a series of (real) numbers 
\begin_inset Formula $\left\{ a_{n}\right\} $
\end_inset

 and a (real) algebra 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathfrak{a}$
\end_inset

 (not necessarily a Lie agebra), what does one get when one computes 
\begin_inset Formula $s(x)=\sum_{n=0}^{\infty}a_{n}x^{n}/n!$
\end_inset

 ? Perhaps there are questions of convergence; what are they, and how can
 they be phrased? Clearly, the 
\begin_inset Formula $s(x)$
\end_inset

 are a ring over the reals; might they be a group? How and when? Under what
 situations are the 
\begin_inset Formula $s(x)$
\end_inset

 elements of a Lie group? What might the Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff formula
 for the 
\begin_inset Formula $s(x)$
\end_inset

 look like? Perhaps it is easier to work in the (universal) enveloping algebra
 for 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathfrak{a}$
\end_inset

, in which case, what does the star product (Moyal product) look like? 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
When is 
\begin_inset Formula $s(x)$
\end_inset

 equal to zero? Are there algebraic varieties -- i.e.
 can the tools of algebraic varieties be applied?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Which algebras are the most interesting to consider first? Would the Clifford
 algebras be a good place to start? 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Whatever that may be.
 Where to start? Surely these kinds of questions have been asked before?
 What are the answers so far? This seems vaguely similar to the Kashvilli-
 blah blah operator equations ...
 Am I actually talking about Banach algebras??? Yes, I guess they're topological
 vector spaces of some kind ...
 but I am interested in the analytic properties...
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
