#LyX 2.2 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 508
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\end_preamble
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "courier" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Crypto Sci-Club Notes
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Notes preparing for sci-club crypto-blockchain pesentation.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
List of possible topics
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Origin of blockchain in WWII Enigma coding machines.
 Maybe explain how these work?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Public key crypto mathematics theory
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Public key crypto examples: PGP/GPG, x.509 certs, SSL/https, onion routing
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Git as a blockchain, and why it was needed - to prevent source code fraud
 (real, not imagined)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
File sharing, sleepcat, torrent architectures
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
bitcoin predecessors: erights.org, how to do banking in a secure container
 by delegation.
 HashCash for spam prevention.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Other weirdo crypto ideas: death-lottery.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
why bitcoin solved a problem that microtransactions could not.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Byzantine generals
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
bitcoin as a ledger: addition subtraction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
but also: multiplication, division, if-statements, loops, – generic algorithms
 – etherium.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The problem with proof-of-work.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Distributed hash tables - Why.
 Examples IPFS and predecessors.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The problem of spam and ddos in IPFS, etc.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Whisper protocols???
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Apps: uncorruptable, uneraseable database.
 When is this desirable? For what reason? Why isn't git enough? (scope of
 git; generic databse issues.
 More to life than SQL)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Apps: unique identity; authetnication; voting, UBI
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Hypothetical Apps: shard storage of mapping/geographic info; a global geographic
 database.
 With control over who sees what information.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Hypothetical apps: Openbook as opensouce face-book with control over information.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Still got scaling issues: 7 billion people, 256/512 bytes of ID per person:
 3.5 terabytes of info to keep in sync globally.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Still got political issues: EULA, DRM, anti-hacking, patents
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
