#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\use_default_options false
\begin_modules
theorems-ams
eqs-within-sections
figs-within-sections
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "courier" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks false
\pdf_pdfborder false
\pdf_colorlinks false
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Shifts and Clocks
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepstas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
17 Nov 2020
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Consider the conventional definition of a measure-preserving dynamical system.
 The time evolution operator can be taken to be a shift operator when expressed
 in a suitable basis.
 The simplest example of this is the Bernoulli process.
 Let's now add one more element to the mix: a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

clock operator
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, consisting of powers of 
\begin_inset Formula $\omega=e^{i\theta}$
\end_inset

 along the diagonal.
 Herman Weyl noted that the shift matrix, together with the clock matrix
 form two parts of a generalization of the Pauli matrices.
 They are dual to each other, via a Vandermonde matrix.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Combined, they provide the Sylvester trace-orthogonal basis for 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathfrak{gl}\left(n,\mathbb{C}\right)$
\end_inset

.
 The 
\begin_inset Formula $n\to\infty$
\end_inset

 limit leads to the algebra of Poisson brackets (presumably a Poisson manifold,
 with appropriate construction, and thus a quantum group).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
The question posed here: how does this play out, if we perform the same
 construction for the Bernoulli process, and/or for the beta-shift, and/or
 for some generic conservative dynamical system?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Vandermonde matrixes can be used to describe time shifts, also, see the
 Vandermonde matrix construction in my beta-shift paper.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
See wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generalizations_of_Pauli_matrices
 for basic sketch.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
