#LyX 1.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 221
\textclass article
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme pslatex
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 1
\use_natbib 0
\use_numerical_citations 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title

Chapter 4
\newline 
-
\newline 
de Rham Curves as Generalized
\newline 
Fractal Curves
\newline 
and the Modular Group 
\begin_inset Formula $SL(2,\mathbb{Z})$
\end_inset 


\layout Author

Linas Vepstas <linas@linas.org>
\layout Date

15 March 2005
\layout Abstract

Fractals unfinished.
 
\layout Abstract

This paper is part of a set of chapters that explore the relationship between
 the real numbers, the modular group, and fractals.
\layout Abstract

XXXX This paper is under construction; it is a rough, unfinished draft.
 XXX
\layout Standard

.
\layout Section

Introduction
\layout Standard

blah
\layout Section

Conclusions
\layout Standard

To be written.
\layout Bibliography
\bibitem [Man88]{key-3}

Benoit Mandelbrot, in 
\emph on 
The Science of Fractal Images, ed.
 Heinz-Otto Peitgen, Dietmar Saupe,
\emph default 
 (Springer-Verlag, 1988) p.
 246
\layout Bibliography
\bibitem [deR57]{key-4}

Georges de Rham, On Some Curves Defined by Functional Equations (1957),
 reprinted in Classics on Fractals, ed.
 Gerald A.
 Edgar, (Addison-Wesley, 1993) pp.
 285-298
\the_end
