#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\usepackage{slashed}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "cmtt" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Metricity and the Circle Map
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepstas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
18 November 2023
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Kolomogorov's(?) circle map 
\begin_inset Formula $x_{n+1}=x_{n}-K\sin2\pi\omega x_{n}$
\end_inset

 famously exihibts both stable mode-locking behavior and chaotic motion.
 In the mode-locked regions, that is, when two different frequencies and
 couplings 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(\omega,K\right)$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(\omega^{\prime},K^{\prime}\right)$
\end_inset

 are close enough to one-another, then the two different sequences 
\begin_inset Formula $x_{n}\left(\omega,K\right)$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $y_{n}\left(\omega^{\prime},K^{\prime}\right)$
\end_inset

 are generally close to one-another as well.
 This paper explores some of the 
\begin_inset Formula $\ell_{p}$
\end_inset

 metrics on the sequences 
\begin_inset Formula $\left\{ x_{n}\right\} $
\end_inset

 generated by the circle map.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The circle map 
\begin_inset Formula $x_{n+1}=x_{n}-K\sin2\pi\omega x_{n}$
\end_inset

 is broadly explored in other texts, and no particular review is given here.
 A few preliminary remarks, though:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The mode-locking behavior provides a simplified model for both electronic
 phase-locked loops, and for orbital, tidal celestial mechanics, where planetary
 bodies and moons can orbit in phase-locked behavior.
 A general understanding of the behavior of this kind of system is interesting
 for both physics and engineering applications.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This system is also interesting from the standpoint of pure mathematics.
 This explorations in this particular paper are inspired by the topology
 of the Moore plane.
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
See Wikipedia, 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
name "Moore plane"
target "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moore_plane"
literal "false"

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\end_inset

 The Moore plane was originally constructed as a counter-example in general
 topology: it is a particular kind of completely regular Hausdorff space
 that is not normal and not metrizable.
 The basis for this inspiration is worth reviewing here, and, for that,
 the defintion of the Moore plane must be breifly sketched.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The Moore plane consists of the closed upper-half subset 
\begin_inset Formula $\Gamma=\left\{ \left(x,y\right)\in\mathbb{R}^{2}\vert y\ge0\right\} $
\end_inset

 of the Euclidean plane 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbb{R}^{2}$
\end_inset

.
 The topology on it is peculiar: it is a combination of the standard topology,
 for points deep inside the plane, and a discrete topology for points near
 the real axis.
 It is defined as follows.
 First, define an open disk of radius 
\begin_inset Formula $\epsilon$
\end_inset

, centered at 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(p,q\right)\in\mathbb{R}^{2}$
\end_inset

 as usual:
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
U_{\epsilon}\left(p,q\right)=\left\{ \left(x,y\right)\vert\left(x-p\right)^{2}+\left(y-q\right)^{2}<\epsilon^{2},\epsilon>0\right\} 
\]

\end_inset

The local basis 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{B}\left(p,q\right)$
\end_inset

 for the topology of the Moore plane is given by the sets
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\mathcal{B}\left(p,q\right)=\begin{cases}
U_{\epsilon}\left(p,q\right) & \mbox{if }q>0\\
V_{\epsilon}\left(p\right)=U_{\epsilon}\left(p,\epsilon\right) & \mbox{if }q=0
\end{cases}
\]

\end_inset

That is, at the real axis, each open disk is supplemented by a single point
 on the real number line.
 This 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

supplementation
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 gives the real axis the discrete topology: it consists only of the points
 in the real number line; there are no open subsets.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Hopefully, the reason why the Moore space can serve as an inspiration is
 clear, without any need for hand-waving or further explanation.
 Something weird happens at the real axis.
 A cursory examination of the cirlce map shows there is much more: something
 different happens for the rationals and the irrationals.
 The circle map is much, much crazier.
 But how can we make contact with the concept of the Moore plane, in a less
 atmospheric manner?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A characteristic of the circle map is that when two parameter sets 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(\omega,K\right)$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(\omega^{\prime},K^{\prime}\right)$
\end_inset

 are close enough to one-another, then the two different iterated sequences
 
\begin_inset Formula $x_{n}\left(\omega,K\right)$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $y_{n}\left(\omega^{\prime},K^{\prime}\right)$
\end_inset

 are also close to one-another.
 This text is a numerical exploration of the metric on the tangent space
 to the parameter space.
 Some definitions and terminology for what this means.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The circle map is taken as the iterated equation 
\begin_inset Formula $x_{n+1}=x_{n}-K\sin2\pi\omega x_{n}$
\end_inset

 for 
\begin_inset Formula $x_{n}\in\mathbb{R}$
\end_inset

 real, and the parameters 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(\omega,K\right)\in\mathbb{R}^{2}$
\end_inset

 real as well.
 By symmetry, the region 
\begin_inset Formula $K<0$
\end_inset

 behavs the same as 
\begin_inset Formula $K>0$
\end_inset

 and so only positive 
\begin_inset Formula $K$
\end_inset

 need to be considered.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In general, the parameters 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(\omega,K\right)\in\mathbb{R}^{2}$
\end_inset

 but the be
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Bibilography
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset CommandInset bibtex
LatexCommand bibtex
btprint "btPrintCited"
bibfiles "../gr"
options "tufte"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
